SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

It is common for people with ADHD to feel they have difficulties in their interpersonal relationships, whether these are friendships, romantic relationships, working
relationships or family relationships. Negotiating social relationships can be just
as difficult with people they know well, with close acquaintances and with strangers. Most teenagers form and develop social relationships from their immediate
environment, such as at school and colleges. However, young people with ADHD
tend to make relationships from the local neighbourhood, for example through parental associates, or by ‘hanging out’ in the street. This perhaps reflects a need for
individuals to draw on wider social networks and sometimes make friends with peers
who are excluded from school or unemployed (Young et al., 2005a).
Children with ADHD often grow up believing that they are misunderstood or
that they are ‘different’ from others in some way. No matter how much they try,
relationships tend to go wrong, and they do not develop as intended or expected.
Anger management and impulse control problems may lead people with ADHD to
have volatile relationships, which break down easily. In the end, they stop trying
and lack the confidence to initiate friendships and more general social behaviour.
Self-awareness of their social difficulties causes distress and, at times, a defensive
attitude. Sometimes these feelings are taken out on loved ones, such as parents or
partners. They may respond in an ‘unnatural’ way or attempt to overcompensate. For
example, often people with ADHD will report feeling that they need to ‘play the
clown’ in social situations in order to mask anxiety or attentional problems. Being
the centre of attention reduces the need for them to focus attention on others. They
may also feel that by being funny and amusing they will be more attractive to others.
However, despite being the ‘life and soul’ of the party, many people with ADHD
report feeling very isolated generally. They find it difficult to form meaningful and
lasting relationships because of low self-esteem and a history of being rejected or let
down by others. They may find others are intolerant of their ADHD symptoms. Some
individuals may be vulnerable to exploitation by others because of their motivation
to be liked and ingratiate themselves in a peer group. They may become part of a
‘bad crowd’, believing that bad friends are better than no friends. Others may be

130 ADHD IN ADULTS
encouraged to engage in antisocial behaviours for the benefit of others, for example,
by delivering drugs, or through, theft from shops. Females, in particular, may try
to compensate by engaging in promiscuous behaviour in an attempt to develop
meaningful relationships. Some people are vulnerable to inappropriate self-disclosure
in an attempt to ‘fast-track’ friendships. Sadly, disruption to social relationships is an
experience often learned at a young age.
It is important for individuals with ADHD to recognise that the way they present
themselves to others can influence the way others interact with them. This includes
the way they talk to others and express themselves (verbal communication), their
non-verbal posture and actions (body language), and the general impression they
give of themselves (emotional expressions, ADHD features). This involves raising
awareness of social behaviour and examining the effect that some or all of these behaviours have on influencing other people’s perceptions. For example, inattention in
ADHD may be misinterpreted by another person as the individual lacking interest in
what they are saying. An adult with ADHD may be perceived as fickle because they
flit from one person to another, or from one topic of conversation to another. This
may be perceived by others as lacking sincerity. Due to impulsivity, individuals with
ADHD may also be prone to making snap decisions and jumping to conclusions.
This means they may take things at face value, based on first impressions and stereotypied influences. For example, if an acquaintance walks down a corridor and does
not acknowledge them, they may immediately assume that that person does not like
them and behave in a way which reflects this, thus leading to a self-fulfilled prophecy. They may not consider other explanations for the lack of acknowledgement, for
example the person being in a hurry and preoccupied with an urgent matter.
The skills covered in this chapter refer to ‘appropriate’ behaviours as determined by
prosocial rules and norms. These should be selected and adapted in a ‘pick and mix’
fashion according to the needs of the client. However, it is worth noting that different
cultures have different social rules. For example, loud and boisterous behaviour may
be viewed as a sign of being social/friendly/happy in some cultures, whilst in others
it may be viewed as rude and obnoxious. Therefore, it is necessary for the therapist
to consider cultural issues. Similarly, the client must think about the social circumstances and the expectations of those around them as this will guide them as to how
they should behave. Different social situations have a range of expectations regarding how individuals should present themselves. For example, the social demands
of an interview are very different from the requirements of being with a group of
friends at a party. It may be more difficult for people with ADHD to be adaptive to
the changing social demands of situations and they may rely on a social repertoire
that has worked well in one setting, but is totally inadequate or inappropriate for
another.
Treatment sessions should be structured to include aspects important for the development of both micro-skills and macro-skills. Micro-skills include the adoption of specific
social skills training techniques to encourage skills such as appropriate eye contact, voice

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

131

volume and tone, body positioning. Macro-skills encompass more complex interactions,
such as giving compliments, constructive feedback, turn-taking and listening skills.
This chapter describes methods to help the therapist facilitate identification of social
skills deficits in adults with ADHD and outlines techniques for improvement. Sessions have a skills development focus and include aspects of verbal communication
(e.g. conversation and listening skills); non-verbal communication (e.g. body language, gestures and posture); emotion recognition; and the modification and regulation of social behaviour in different social settings (e.g. at work, at parties). The
chapter pays particular attention to difficult situations that individuals may face. This
includes coping with rejection, as many individuals with ADHD experience rejection
frequently more than most. This is encountered early in school when children report
feeling socially isolated and recall times when they played alone in the playground,
being the last to be picked for team activities, not having anyone to sit next to on
school trips and not being invited to tea. These early experiences mean that as they
grow up and can exercise greater choice and control over how and with whom they
spend their time, they may avoid social situations. However, individuals with ADHD
are not naturally reclusive as they are enthusiastic, social and friendly people. Thus,
the paradox is that they desire and strive for social acceptance, but feel anxious when
in company or in social situations, and uncertain about how to behave. It also means
they are unsure and nervous about disclosing their ADHD status in new relationships. This latter issue is one of the most hotly debated issues discussed at our clinic
in group treatment sessions.

IDENTIFICATION OF SOCIAL PROBLEMS
Some clients may report ‘hundreds’ of good friends but on closer questioning these
turn out to be casual acquaintances with the other ‘friend’ probably holding an entirely different perspective of the relationship. It is extremely important to overcome
defensiveness and embarrassment about social relationship difficulties as it is clearly
difficult for the therapist to help unless the client recognises and acknowledges
the problem. Thus, the first step to improving social relationships is through selfevaluation and identification of target areas for treatment that the client may wish
to build on to give more confidence and proficiency when interacting with others.
Table 8.1 presents a social skills questionnaire completed by a client who lacked
confidence socialising in large groups, such as at parties. The questionnaire may
be self-rated or completed by friends/family. The aim is for clients to identify their
areas of weakness that become treatment targets for skills development. If the client
rates a high number of ‘I don’t know’ responses, then it may be helpful for clients to
ask family and/or friends to complete a questionnaire. However, people with ADHD
may lack insight into their social problems, in which case this is a useful exercise
to compare their own perspective with that of others. Discrepancies can be used as
a basis for further discussion and treatment to help them develop a more accurate
interpretation of intentions and emotions signalled by others.

132 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 8.1

Social skills questionnaire

How good are you at…

Never Rarely
good good

Sometimes
good

Mostly Always
good
good

1. Interacting with friends



2. Interacting with strangers
3. Talking to strangers at
parties




4. Going to parties



5. Meeting a friend in the pub



6. Listening to people



7. Starting a conversation



8. Asking questions



9. Answering questions



10. Admitting if something
has not been understood



11. Looking at people when
talking to them



12. Not fidgeting



13. Speaking clearly



14. Recognising how others
are feeling



15. Explaining to others about
your ADHD diagnosis

I don’t
know



VERBAL COMMUNICATION SKILLS
The way we present ourselves verbally (aspects of our voice, speech and conversation) informs others of how pleasant or easy it is to interact with us. Too little or
too much talking can cause difficulties in how well others are able to listen to or
understand us. People with ADHD often interrupt or butt into other people’s conversations. They may switch topics of conversation or ‘go off at a tangent’ and this can
be difficult for the listener to understand or follow what they are saying. People with
ADHD often report a feeling of ceaseless mental activity, which can be exhausting
for both the individual themselves and the people with whom they communicate.
They can be particularly excitable by novelty and high stimulation, and may have
a tendency to speak rapidly, too loudly and too much when they get excited. At
such times, they may experience a ‘flood’ of ideas and thoughts, which, although
enthusiastically expressed, are hard for the listener to keep up with and follow. The
listener may be overwhelmed or bored if they do not share the same interest. Thus it

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS
Table 8.2

133

Characteristics of ADHD speech and suggestions for improvement

Feature

ADHD characteristic

Perceived by others

Skill development

Rate

Speaking too quickly;
others are unable to
keep up

Intense personality, a
person who is ‘hard
work’

Slowing down and taking
breaths between
sentences

Clarity

Mumbling

Lacking in confidence

Speaking clearly,
articulating each word

Intonation

Speaking at a high
pitch

Overexcitable
personality,
irrational,
histrionic

Lowering the tone of the
voice

Fluency

Becoming distracted
and going off at a
tangent

Disinterested in
others and lacking
in sincerity

Keeping track and
structuring what is
being said

Volume

Speaking loudly

Aggressive and
intimidating

Quietening to a moderate
volume

Amount

Talking too much

Superficial and
narcissistic

Being more succinct,
learning to summarise
information or get to
the point more quickly

is important for individuals with ADHD to increase their awareness of times when
they are speaking too quickly and making people feel pressured or rushed. At such
times, the response of the listener may be to withdraw.

Rate of Speech
Clients may benefit from using self-talk to encourage themselves to ‘slow down’. By
practising this skill, they can appear calmer, more collected, confident and in control
when talking to others. Clients should also learn to attend to physiological changes
in the body, for example, as they become excited and aroused about a subject, they
may feel hot, or notice their heart beating faster. Identifying physical changes will
allow them to consider that they may be speaking too fast or overly passionately
about a topic. Rehearsal is another useful method of improving rate and volume of
verbal communication and this may be done initially through reading passages or
repeating what the therapist says. The client should then move on to role-playing
situations and it is especially helpful if this can be recorded and discussed in sessions. By playback of the recording, the client becomes the observer or listener in the
interaction and is better able to take an alternative perspective. Performance may be
self-rated (or informant-rated) according to each of the variables in Tables 8.2, 8.3
and 8.4 (see, also, the Companion Website).

134 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 8.3

Conversational skills

Feature

ADHD characteristic

Skill development

Turn-taking

Not giving the other person
the opportunity to talk

Allowing equal talking times

Interruptions

Butting into conversations

Timing speech appropriately, i.e.
waiting for others to finish

Multiple
questioning

Interrogating other people

Asking questions to stimulate
conversation

Latency

Delaying after someone has
asked a question

Giving a prompt response

Being relevant

Wandering off the topic and
confusing people

Keeping the conversation relevant
and to the point

Interesting content

Conversation is motivated by
ADHD individual’s interest

Making it of interest to other
people to maintain their attention

Repairing

Being offended by mistakes,
e.g. if other person calls
you by the wrong name

Correcting them politely

Overenthusiasm

Dominating the conversation.
Not asking questions or
opinion of others. Talking
about yourself all the time

Develop listening skills. Ask
questions

Conversational Skills
People with ADHD have a tendency to dominate and monopolise conversation, with
little recognition of turn-taking or the level of interest the listener has in a topic. They
also have difficulty attending to what others are saying, drift off, and lose the thread
of the conversation. This may lead them to butt in and make inappropriate comments.
Conversations may appear very ‘one-sided’ and the client must learn to balance talking and listening. Putting questions to another person indicates interest in that person,
such as in their life and in what they have to say and contribute to a conversation.
Recording sessions and/or role-play interactions are helpful techniques to demonstrate appropriate and inappropriate skills. These should be discussed from the
perspective of each person in the dyad. Improvements in some of the common
problem areas outlined in Table 8.3 can be rated on a Likert scale (see Companion
Website) – either by self-evaluation of progress, self-ratings of observed recordings,
or informant-evaluation of progress.

Listening Skills
It is clear from the foregoing that listening skills are a big problem for people with
ADHD and a primary target for intervention. Clients may not have adequate listening

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS
Table 8.4

135

Listening skills

Feature

ADHD characteristic

Skill development

Attending

Not maintaining focus
on what is being said

See Chapter 4

Acknowledgement

Seeming not to listen

Responding as though you have heard
what has been said, e.g. ‘mm’, ‘yes’
or nodding head

Responding

Not noticing a question,
or saying ‘I don’t
know’

Acknowledgements, e.g. nodding,
saying ‘oh right’. Sharing your
opinion or giving question-type
feedback, e.g. ‘did you really?’

Personal selfdisclosure

Fear of people prying
into their private life

Sharing information can put others at
ease

Reflecting

Forgetting what someone
has said

Repeating them means that you have
more chance of remembering and
makes the other person feel that you
are listening to what they are saying

skills for two reasons. First, they do not give the person an opportunity to speak,
thus appearing uninterested in their point of view. This occurs when they become
overly aroused (either by anxiety or enthusiasm) and they are motivated to fill the gap
by talking, or their thoughts tumble out in an incoherent jumbled manner. Second,
they do not adequately attend to what the person is saying, perhaps because they are
distracted by noise or activities going on around them or because they are focusing
on what they are going to say next (or perhaps internally distracted by lots of thoughts
and ideas springing to mind). Specific listening skills are outlined in Table 8.4 (see the
Companion Website for this in a format suitable for use in sessions).

NON-VERBAL COMMUNICATION SKILLS
Non-verbal communication can express thoughts and feelings without the use of
spoken language. A great deal of information is conveyed non-verbally. A useful
exercise is to watch a television programme with the sound turned down, and ask the
client what they think is being said and how the speaker/recipient feels. Ask the client why they have come to their view and guide them to think about subtle indicators
by body language. This will increase awareness of how individuals communicate
non-verbally and how they are perceived by others. It will also improve their ability
to correctly ‘read’ the non-verbal cues of behaviour.
ADHD symptoms themselves may convey inaccurate information about the individual, for example attentional deficits may be interpreted as lack of interest. A tapping
foot may be misinterpreted as impatience and rudeness rather than as a restless

136 ADHD IN ADULTS
symptom of ADHD or anxiety. Impulsive interruptions or gestures may seem discourteous or abrupt by listeners and perceived by the listeners to be insulting.
Non-verbal cues serve a very important function in social interaction and by explaining the rationale of certain non-verbal cues to clients, they will be more inclined to
introduce these more frequently in their social interactions.

Making Eye Contact
This informs others they are being listened to and are interesting. Clients should try
to look people in the eye intermittently, as avoiding eye contact may be interpreted
as them feeling bored with the conversation, lacking interest in the conversation
and/or not listening. Staring people straight in the eye without looking away may be
interpreted as aggression and/or intimidation.

Facial Expression
Facial expressions inform others of feelings, such as smiling when happy, scowling
when dissatisfied. Some facial expressions may evoke undesirable responses from
others, for example, failing to smile when greeted may be interpreted as being
unfriendly. It may be helpful to look at magazine photographs together and using the
list of possible feelings, outlined in Table 8.5, see how well the client and therapist
agree about facial expressions and their portrayal of the feelings of the person in the
picture. Emotions can be role-played using facial expressions only. Then subsequent
introduction of body posture and language in these role-plays will help the client
build up a repertoire of social cues. Table 8.5 (available on the Companion Website)
provides a suggested ‘emotion list’ from which the therapist and/or client may select
an emotion to act out a situation or guess the emotion portrayed (for example the
therapist may role-play eating a meal and act out a feeling of satisfaction and the
client has to guess the feeling ‘satisfaction’).
Table 8.5

Emotions and facial expressions

Positive emotions

Negative emotions

Calm
Happy
Excited
Satisfied
Relaxed
Sexy
Loving
Proud
Attentive
Important

Disappointed
Frustrated
Ashamed
Bored
Restless
Tired
Sad
Angry
Frightened
Confused

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

137

Posture
This informs others of attitude, for example slouching may be interpreted as laziness/disinterest. An upright body posture can inform others that attention is being
paid. Magazine photographs can also be discussed from this perspective.

Body Movements
Body movements add emphasis to what is being said. However, excessive use may be
annoying to others, such as fiddling or fidgeting. Pointing a finger at someone may
be perceived as intimidating or provocative. Nodding your head when someone is
talking shows that they have been understood, and that you are in agreement with
them and supportive.

Physical Proximity
This informs others of familiarity as well as intention. Distance and ‘personal space’
will be different with different people, for example, you stand closer to a friend than
to a stranger. Personal boundaries are usually invaded when a person behaves in an
aggressive and provocative manner.
Figure 8.1 summarises some useful ‘do’s’ and ‘don’ts’ with regard to social communication (see Companion Website for the figure in handout format).

EMOTION RECOGNITION
Misappraisal of social situations may arise from misinterpretation of social cues.
These basic social perception skills are crucial for recognising and engaging in
appropriate social behaviour. These can be rehearsed in role play and modelling
an appropriate response. In particular, people with ADHD may be less able to
recognise emotional cues due to poor attentional control. This means they are disadvantaged through an inability to adapt their behaviour appropriately in response
to another’s mood state. Social information drawing on verbal and non-verbal cues
constantly requires reading and integration. It is important that responses can be
shifted according to changing cues and emotion recognition is an important aspect
of the process. To be able to better understand others, clients with ADHD need to
be encouraged to look out for ‘clues’ or indicators (some of which may be subtle)
about how that person may be feeling, i.e. what kind of mood they may be in.
Emotional cues can be perceived from several sources and are presented on the
Companion Website in a format that can be used as a source for discussion in
treatment, including facial expressions, posture, gesture and voice quality (see
Table 8.6 below).

138 ADHD IN ADULTS
DO

DON’T

Personal space

Confident Posture

Make sure personal space is not
invaded or that the other person
is too distant.

Stand upright, with head held high
and self-belif

Establish eye contact
Looking at the other person in the
eye regularly, not avoiding their
gaze or fixing a stare.

Facial expression
and gestures
Avoid fidgeting. Use appropriate body
language and gestures

Talk,talk
talk,talk,...

Talk,talk
talk,talk,...

Volume

Pace

Shouting can seem aggressive,
mumbling can seem too passive,
it’s important to find a balance

Speaking too quickly can make others
feel agitated or lose track.
Slowing down will be more relaxing
for both of you

Dont’t forget to
smile!

Figure 8.1 How to communicate effectively

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

139

Table 8.6 Emotion recognition
Facial expression

Happy ⫽ eyebrows neutral, eyes screwed up, mouth
elongated and corners up
Sad ⫽ eyebrows down, eyes lower, corners of mouth down
Angry ⫽ eyebrows lowered, eyes wide open, mouth tense,
nostrils flaring

Posture

Happy ⫽ hands in the air, waving, hands outspread – ‘open’
presentation
Sad ⫽ body bent up, head down, hands to face – ‘closed’
presentation
Angry ⫽ fist up and clenched, leaning forward

Gestures

Happy ⫽ waving arms about, clapping hands together
Sad ⫽ restricted, hands in pocket, shoulders slumped
Angry ⫽ fist shaking, finger wagging, pointing, foot stamping

Voice quality

Happy ⫽ loud, high and variable pitch, fast
Sad ⫽ soft, slow, low
Angry ⫽ loud, high, harsh

Facial Expression
The key is to focus on the different movements and patterns of a person’s eyebrows,
eyes and mouth for cues on how someone is feeling. It is possible that some individuals with ADHD mistake a happy face, with eyes slightly scrunched up and teeth
showing, for an angry face. They can also miss facial cues due to poor attention and
thus not pick up on someone’s altered mood state. Examples of typical emotion states
include:
Happy ⫽ eyebrows neutral, eyes screwed up, mouth elongated and corners up
Sad ⫽ eyebrows down, eyes lower, corners of mouth down
Angry ⫽ eyebrows lowered, eyes wide open, mouth tense, nostrils flaring

Posture
Positioning of different parts of the body produces an overall pattern, which can
convey emotions to others. People with ADHD can often forget that their posture
can be read, and enter situations with an anxious and tense posture, which can override all their efforts to make appropriate conversation. They can also misinterpret

140 ADHD IN ADULTS
others’ postures as aggressive if someone is standing in an assertive way. Examples
of postural emotion expressions include:
Happy ⫽ hands in the air, waving, hands outspread – ‘open’ presentation
Sad ⫽ body bent up, head down, hands to face – ‘closed’ presentation
Angry ⫽ fist up and clenched, leaning forward

Gestures
The pattern of movements of a person’s hands, arms and shoulders can reveal a
great deal about how they are feeling. Since people with ADHD tend to fidget and
make rapid movements, this can be misinterpreted by others as threatening or distracting. Furthermore, fidgeting can make others feel irritable and annoyed, wishing
that the person would stop fiddling, and lead them to terminate the conversation
early. People with ADHD can also misperceive emotional gestures or find sudden
movements unsettling when they have lost attention in a conversation, leading them
to react inappropriately. For example:
Happy ⫽ waving arms about, clapping hands together
Sad ⫽ restricted, hands in pocket, shoulders slumped
Angry ⫽ fist shaking, finger wagging, pointing, foot stamping
A fun way of learning to display and read social behaviour and emotions is to roleplay feelings in the session with the client. The client and therapist take it in turns to
select emotions listed in Table 8.5 and instead of just relying on facial expressions
as previously outlined, the speaker and the observer have to guess the emotion expressed drawing also on gestures.

Voice Quality
The pattern of tone, speed and loudness of speech usually varies with emotions.
Someone’s mood state can be clear from the quality of someone’s voice without any
recognition of the content. If people with ADHD have become distracted, a route
back into a conversation can be for them to establish the tone of the topic before
interrupting inappropriately, for example, with a cheery flippant remark when someone is explaining how unhappy they have become. Other examples of the way voice
quality can express emotions are:
Happy ⫽ loud, high and variable pitch, fast
Sad ⫽ soft, slow, low
Angry ⫽ loud, high, harsh

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

141

A useful exercise with clients is to watch video recordings of social behaviour (soap
television programmes are particularly good for this purpose) and analyse the emotions presented together. Through positive reinforcement of the client’s judgements,
they will develop greater confidence about interpreting social situations correctly. It
may also be helpful to develop the theme further by pausing the video and discussing
the consequences of the behaviour/interaction, in other words, how they think the
other person will respond. This will encourage the ADHD person to think about the
consequences of behaviour and consider alternative possibilities rather than jumping in with both feet and making snap decisions or incorrect assumptions based on
inadequate information.

MODIFICATION AND REGULATION OF SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR
IN DIFFERENT SOCIAL SETTINGS
So far social skills training techniques have been discussed, which the individual may
employ to improve verbal and non-verbal methods of communication. However, social
interaction is a dynamic process, which usually involves rapid shifts in the appraisal
of a situation and the ability to respond in an appropriate way. A particular difficulty
of individuals with ADHD is self-regulation. This means they may not be good at
modifying their behaviour in complex social situations, just as they may have difficulty
determining subtle shifts in the attitude of others. Responding to the variable demands
in social situations becomes a problem as they develop a set way of behaving, such as
being jovial, which works in one setting but may not be portable. It can therefore be
helpful to role-play changing social demands and look for shifts in behaviour patterns.
The type of social situations that can be problematic for people with ADHD include
making and maintaining friends, talking to members of the opposite sex, not knowing many people in a social situation, maintaining important and/or formal conversations, refusing unreasonable requests, dealing with criticism, apologising and/or
admitting mistakes, and disclosure of ADHD status.

Making and Maintaining New Friends
Although some people with ADHD may appear to be the centre of attention and
the ‘life of the party’, they may actually lack many meaningful relationships or true
friendships. Recognising that interpersonal relationships require mutual effort and
input is a good starting point. However, for people with ADHD, it is much more difficult to maintain friendships in adulthood than childhood. In adulthood there are
fewer ‘enforced’ social opportunities than those experienced in childhood, such as
playtimes at school. Thus, children with ADHD at least have a peer set to refer to for
reinforcement (both positive and negative) of their social behaviours. Nevertheless
making friends and maintaining friends is a long-standing problem. This causes
some adults to have a propensity to impulsively curtail relationships early, for

142 ADHD IN ADULTS
example, when someone lets them down or cancels arrangements at the last minute. It
is therefore important to reinforce the idea that relationships require persistence and
flexibility, but they need to learn to read social situations accurately. Attentional problems may mean that individuals forget arrangements or fail to keep in touch. Time
management strategies (see Chapter 5) will help individuals make plans to meet up
with friends, remind them of the appointment and remember important dates such as
birthdays. Telephone and information technology is becoming increasingly sophisticated in helping us plan and organise our time and individuals should be encouraged
to incorporate strategies such as text messages and emails in their daily routine.

Talking to Members of the Opposite/Same Sex
Individuals with ADHD have a natural enthusiasm but this may result in them becoming excited and overeffusive when meeting someone to whom they are attracted. This
may be perceived as boisterousness or ‘showing off’. Their eagerness may lead them
to push limits and seek to escalate intimate relationships at a faster pace than is anticipated or acceptable to the other party. Role-plays designed to encourage the individuals to note the behaviour and body language of the person of interest, and then match
and mirror this can be a useful exercise for the individual with ADHD. It teaches them
to focus their attention and inhibit impulsive responses and/or assumptions.

Not Knowing Many People in a Social Situation
Whilst most people experience some anxiety about entering social situations in
which they do not know anyone or very few people, people with ADHD are often
acutely anxious about their ability to cope in such social settings. This is because
they have often received negative feedback in the past when they have said the wrong
thing, drawn unwanted attention to themselves, felt foolish or perceived disinterest or
rejection by others (see Chapter 9 on Anxiety for further information). Social events
can be intimidating and the client may be helped by carefully planning and rehearsing appropriate social behaviour beforehand. The therapist should review strategies
that the client has found helpful in the past, along with techniques that they have
successfully used to resolve problems in previous sessions that may be adapted for
this purpose, for example, distracting or challenging negative thoughts. In sessions
topical news items that are of interest to the client can be rehearsed in conversation
(e.g. from newspapers or magazine articles). The client should be guided to observe
the ‘rules’ of interaction, such as turn-taking, body posture, etc. In preparation for a
social event in advance, the client can choose three current news items and/or choose
to recount interesting details regarding a recent personal event. This will ‘arm’ the
client with something to talk about if they are worried that they may run out of things
to say and/or blurt out something inappropriate and look stupid. Whilst this preparatory work in sessions may increase the client’s confidence in social settings, they
should be discouraged from talking about themselves all the time or monopolising
the conversation. An important technique to teach the client is to get the other person

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

143

to talk about themselves by encouraging the client to ask questions and listening to
the answers. The target person should not feel they are under interrogation but that
the person they are talking to is really interested in what they have to say. Role-plays
in sessions will be helpful for the client to get the balance right.

Maintaining Important and/or Formal Conversations
People with ADHD can sometimes appear overfamiliar due to a lack of formality,
poor impulse control and/or anxiety. This is very likely to be perceived by others as
them not taking the matter or situation seriously. They may be viewed as superficial,
uncaring and/or irresponsible. It is extremely important that individuals respond
appropriately to the formality of a situation. For example, when interacting with
individuals in authority, such as in a police interview, people with ADHD should
be advised that being overly formal is better received than informality. Using titles
can increase the sense of respect, so clients should be discouraged from using first
names. In the workplace, they need to adopt a level of professionality when interacting with colleagues and line management. The client may need to develop various
impression management techniques, such as the manner of addressing authority figures (e.g. the police or occupational managers); to review the use of slang and swear
words commonly used by the client for acceptability as some words are unsuitable
for formal occasions and may even cause offence; and to pace speech differently as
serious and important conversations are more likely to be paced more slowly.
One of the most frequently experienced ‘formal settings’ is that of the job interview.
People with ADHD are often disadvantaged at interview by their ADHD symptoms, which are exacerbated in this situation by anxiety, causing them to become
distracted, to not listen fully to questions, give impulsive responses and fidget in
their seat. It is particularly important for people with ADHD to prepare well for
such events. The first step is to work out a route to the destination with a time plan.
Arriving late, hot and flushed is not a good start and will unnecessarily increase
anxiety! Practising asking for questions to be repeated or rephrased can be a useful
skill to develop and rehearse in therapy. The introduction of anxiety management
techniques may also help empower the individual (see Chapter 9 on Anxiety).

Refusing Unreasonable Requests
People with ADHD are often motivated to forge interpersonal relationships by a
need to be liked, as they have difficulty getting along with others for any length of
time. This means they may at times accede to unreasonable demands as they are
eager to please others. Some individuals may be vulnerable to exploitation by others.
This may mean they put pressure on themselves to fulfill certain roles or functions to
a standard that they cannot achieve and they let down the person they are seeking to
ingratiate or impress. They may behave in a way that is hurtful to other people who
love them. The client needs to recognise this pattern of interaction, acknowledge

144 ADHD IN ADULTS
it and resolve it. Sessions that focus on social perspective taking (by challenging
negative thoughts and assumptions; identifying dysfunctional assumptions about
weakness and failure; and acting out different roles of a dyad), rehearsing situations
that acknowledge mistakes and apologising for them will prepare the client to put
this into practice ‘in vivo’. Some individuals may be asked to comply with illegal
requests, for example, to steal items, deliver drugs. They may come under peer pressure to take risks and engage in dangerous or reckless behaviour, such as driving a
car whilst drunk. Challenging negative thoughts about what it means to be a ‘dissenter’ may be a useful exercise.
Assertiveness techniques, described in Chapter 10, will be helpful for the client to improve their ability to assert themselves with confidence, reduce feelings of inadequacy
and choose a course of prosocial behaviour. The therapist can teach the client to evaluate the feasibility of requests by creating a list of advantages and disadvantages of
complying with a request. It is recommended that initially these are set out in writing.
Of course, this is not possible during a social interaction and strategies for postponing decisions should be role-played with the therapist, for example the client may be
helped by rehearsing making a statement such as ‘OK, I’ll give it some thought and
come back to you’ or ‘I can’t talk about this right now as I have to go, but I’ll phone
you about it later’. Once the client has got used to applying the technique, they should
be encouraged to learn to apply it as a cognitive process so they can respond immediately. The written word, however, is powerful and should not be underestimated.
Important choices should always be made by writing down advantages and disadvantages of options. Strategies for refusing to take on additional responsibilities or
demands may be developed by the client and therapist role-playing scenarios in which
the client rehearses saying ‘no’ and refusing to comply with a request.

Dealing with Criticism
People with ADHD are used to being criticised. They have been criticised by their
parents at home, by teachers at school, and by youth workers in social settings. To
name a few, they may have been labelled obstinate, hyperactive, unruly, disruptive,
oppositional, aggressive, rude, disobedient, unhelpful or lazy. Adults are taught that
criticism should always be constructive but this technique of delivering criticism
is not always applied. Even when it is, what the child or young person with ADHD
hears is only the criticism. ADHD children have tried to do better, they have tried to
improve and please their mother, teacher, youth worker, neighbours and friends but it
never quite comes out right. Their intentions are good but are often not achieved because something gets in the way or distracts them from their course of action. But just
because they have always been criticised and are used to it, does not mean that it no
longer hurts. As time passes, individuals learn to put up a ‘front’ that defends them
from critical onslaughts. This may be perceived as a lack of interest in the impact
of their behaviour or attitude towards family and friends. The more criticism they
receive, the more they protect themselves by disregarding it. This means that helpful

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

145

feedback may be ignored. Clients will know about criticism as they have grown up
with it. What they need to learn is the cycle of negativity outlined above, and how a
negative attitude – which is their protective mechanism – provides a feedback loop
that induces negative behaviour and critical attitudes from others. They need to learn
to listen to the ‘constructive’ part of feedback, as this may provide important advice,
and to become less hypersensitive to just one part of the message. Specific techniques
for dealing with criticism are outlined in Chapter 10 on anger management.

Apologising and/or Admitting Mistakes
Saying sorry is a difficult skill as it involves admitting an error. This makes some
people feel exposed. As children, people with ADHD have often felt blamed or held
responsible for things for which they should not have been. They have often apologised for misdemeanours they have not fully understood, for example they cannot
think through the outcome of a given situation and this has not been explicitly explained to them, such as drawing their attention to the potential dangers of playing
with matches, or playing ‘chicken’ across roads and railway tracks. In adulthood,
some individuals are frequently pedantic and argumentative. They are more motivated to explain their point and be ‘right’, than think about an issue from a different
perspective. It is not possible to be right all the time and the ability to compromise
is important in negotiating interpersonal relationships. The therapist must help the
client to find common ground and compromise, even if this means agreeing that a
difference of opinion exists. However, because some adults with ADHD have a defensive attitude and are intolerant of attitudes that are not similar to their own, they
may behave in a way that is hurtful towards others. This means they need to recognise this pattern of interaction, acknowledge it and resolve it. Sessions that focus on
social perspective taking (e.g. by challenging negative thoughts and assumptions,
which may identify dysfunctional assumptions about weakness and failure; and acting out different roles of a dyad), rehearsing situations that acknowledge mistakes
and apologising for them will make it easier for the client to put this into practice ‘in
vivo’. Possibilities will probably present themselves that can be modelled in treatment
sessions. For example, if a client forgets to do their homework or arrives late for a
session, the therapist should express their own thoughts and feelings, for example, by
saying that they felt annoyed that the client had arrived late for the session; that this
had made them feel the treatment was a low priority. If a client misses a session the
therapist should express deep concern about the welfare of the client, for example,
they may have had an accident. It is important that the therapist expresses their concern and/or distress and goes on to explicitly outline what the client may have done
to reduce this, such as by telephoning to say they are late because of traffic.

Disclosure of ADHD Status
One of the most challenging social issues for people with ADHD is whether to reveal
that they have the disorder to acquaintances, colleagues, friends and family. If they

146 ADHD IN ADULTS
decide to make this disclosure, they need to evaluate at what stage in their relationship to do so and/or the most appropriate time. This is a very important issue for
adults with ADHD and a great source of anxiety that is hotly debated during the
group treatment sessions run at our service. This topic has therefore been expanded
in Chapter 6 on problem-solving techniques. Some individuals resolve the issue by
telling everyone they meet, irrespective of the anticipated outcome. Other people are
very circumspect and do not even tell close members of their family.
A primary concern seems to be related to anxiety about how other people will
respond/react to them if they know they have the disorder. They worry about possible stigma or inaccurate understanding about the disorder and believe this will affect them in the future, for example, through discrimination in the workplace. This
was a particular concern for one client who worked as a manager in a supermarket
and was terrified that his boss would find out that he had ADHD and that he took
medication. Although he did well in his job and had been promoted, he thought this
would prevent future promotions as he would be perceived as an individual unable
to cope with greater managerial responsibility. This client was also very concerned
that the staff he managed would discover that he had ADHD, as he believed he
would become a source of ridicule and be defined as a ‘nut’ who needed psychiatric
medication. This caused him to feel anxious and stressed as it took effort to ‘hide’
the disorder. The client felt he could not be himself and he felt isolated, which
reinforced childhood feelings of being misunderstood, alone and set apart from
others.
Other people with ADHD respond in quite a different way. They act indiscriminately
by being overtly open towards people they do not know very well and by giving them
a lot of personal information and unnecessary detail about themselves, including
their ADHD status. This causes people to feel uncomfortable and withdraw, which is
perceived by the individual with ADHD as rejection. Alternatively, other people may
take advantage of the person with ADHD by viewing their social insecurities as an
opportunity to exploit them (e.g. encouraging them to become involved in antisocial
or criminal activities).
ADHD individuals report that they spend a lot of time trying to tease apart ‘what
is me’ and ‘what is ADHD’, but very few come to any conclusions. This process is
most likely to occur following diagnosis and treatment with medication. Indeed,
this process may become a source of distress as people feel that their personality
is only associated with the ADHD disorder and not ‘owned’ by them as individuals. Following treatment, this preoccupation seems to become more marked and it
is helpful to improve self-awareness by outlining a story or description of ‘what I
am like as a person’. Of course, this will include characteristics that are generally
associated with ADHD, but will also include case-specific characteristics that relate
personally to the individual. When completing this task, the client should be encouraged to include as many positive aspects about themselves as possible. They should
then imagine that they spend six months on a desert island and consider what other

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

147

people (friends, family, work colleagues, partners) would miss about them during
this period. By increasing an awareness of self – both the positive and negative – the
client will be more able to improve the way in which they interact with others. This
means they will have greater confidence about how to explain to others about their
ADHD condition and how it affects them personally, to whom they give their explanation and when.
Many members of the public have misconceptions about ADHD. The client themselves is often the best source of information about what it is like to have ADHD.
Once the client has decided to disclose to someone that they have ADHD, it will
be helpful if they can give that person some written information about ADHD
and/or explain fi rst-hand ways in which they can be helped and/or changes that
can be made to the environment that will optimise performance. For example,
by being precise and succinct in instructions and in their interactions, such as
by feeding back (constructively) if they are getting overenthusiastic, interrupting others, standing too close, talking too loud, etc. Instead of being expected
to remember lots of information, they can write it down, for example having a
‘things to do’ list, shopping lists, etc. Nevertheless, some people prefer not to disclose their ADHD to anyone and hold their diagnosis as a safely guarded secret.
Seeking social support is a constructive coping strategy and if individuals do not
wish to ‘come out’ publicly they may find it helpful to link with ADHD support
services. Often these groups have internet chat rooms, which are an important
source of practical information and emotional support, and which can be accessed
anonymously.
Once they have disclosed that they have ADHD, some people will undoubtedly feel
that they are being judged in some way and possibly experience rejection (real or
perceived). This perception is likely to be stable in spite of the fact that several factors may have influenced the disclosure. The therapist can help the client examine
whether this is an accurate perception and determine the dysfunctional assumptions
that arise from (or result from) their thoughts.

CONCLUSIONS
Social relationship difficulties can be the source of many problems associated
with ADHD, including anxiety, depression, low self-esteem and substance misuse.
Moreover, these comorbid difficulties, in addition to the core symptoms of ADHD
themselves, can impact on social behaviour, through inattention, poor impulse control and restlessness or fidgeting. A common theme for individuals with ADHD is
feeling isolated and misunderstood, despite paradoxically often seeming gregarious
and self-assured in social situations. Clients’ confidence in their social abilities can
be improved through psychoeducation techniques regarding verbal and non-verbal
communication. Several exercises have been suggested in the chapter to help individuals to determine their own social strengths and weaknesses, with strategies to

148 ADHD IN ADULTS
develop both self-awareness and recognition of others’ social intent. In particular,
the chapter has introduced techniques to improve the ability to recognise emotion by
accurately identifying facial expressions, posture and gestures. Social situations are
often transitory and variable in nature requiring swift responses and rapid change in
social discourse. This is a considerable challenge for individuals who have developed
a set of maladaptive social repertoires.

9
