PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE

This is the last chapter in the Young–Bramham Programme. By the time the final
stages of treatment have been reached, the therapist is likely to feel that they have
shared a journey of self-development with the client. The journey probably started
with the words ‘You have ADHD’. To the client, these words were not just a diagnosis, but a framework for self-understanding. The client is very likely to feel that they
have undertaken an emotionally demanding process culminating in self-adjustment,
adaptation and, finally, acceptance of their condition.
As a therapist, the journey’s course has involved imparting new psychological techniques in order to develop or enhance the client’s skills. The modular design of
the Young–Bramham Programme has provided the structure to tailor the psychological intervention to the needs of the client. This began in Part I of the book,
which described the background to the programme and provided advice about psychological assessment of the core symptoms of ADHD, in other words, inattention
and memory problems, time management and problem-solving difficulties, and poor
impulse control. Treatment modules to manage these problems were outlined in the
second part of the book. Part III provided treatment modules providing interventions for the comorbid conditions and associated problems commonly experienced
by people with ADHD.
This final module – preparing for the future – is extremely important as it entails
a shift from problem-resolution towards a more positive position involving the
optimisation of the client’s strengths and their future application. It is important to
be mindful, nevertheless, that the end of treatment is always difficult. This may be
particularly so for ADHD individuals who have experienced a lifetime of telling
their story yet feel that no one has listened or shown interest. The therapist who has
conducted the Young–Bramham Programme has not only listened but also provided
a programme suitable for the client’s personal needs and development. This level of

256 ADHD IN ADULTS
support or understanding may be new to the client and thus the ending of treatment
must be carefully managed.
It is suggested that the final treatment sessions provide a pragmatic review of what
has been learnt, but also acknowledge and processe the emotional journey undertaken by the client. This will involve thinking about the future, raising self-esteem,
reviewing achievements and considering how to maximise these in the future to
promote healthy mental functioning and instrumental success.
Consistent with the general format of the Young–Bramham Programme modules,
the last module begins with a psychoeducational aspect in the form of a discussion regarding the heterogeneous progression of ADHD. There then follows discussion about what the client expects in the future, and a review of the progress
made to date. The objective is to increase awareness of how ADHD may impact on
individuals in the years ahead; making plans for the future; and how best to enlist
support in future endeavours. It is important to emphasise the positive aspects of
having ADHD such as creativity and resilience, and discuss how the client can apply
these characteristics adaptively to achieve success in everyday challenges, as well
as in medium and longer-term plans. In particular it is important to consider how
expectations of the self may influence future outcomes and become self-fulfilling
prophecies. Many people with ADHD have negative assumptions about themselves
and an expectation of failure. Yet, through the reappraisal of their capabilities,
people with ADHD can be encouraged to develop a greater sense of self-efficacy
and purpose.
Thus, the latter sessions of the Young–Bramham Programme review the potential progression and sequelae of ADHD and summarise salient themes that have
arisen in treatment. Cognitive behavioural techniques that have been effective in
prior modules should be emphasised and reinforced. Raising self-esteem is an
implicit theme in every module throughout the Young–Bramham Programme,
but at the end of treatment this becomes more explicit with the introduction of
specific techniques to draw attention to past successes and achievements and
improve confidence in future performance and self-efficacy. Finally, the therapist
should engage the client in a process of transferring the emotional and practical support provided in treatment sessions to outside resources. This may include enlisting the help of friends, family and sometimes the services of other
professionals.
Hence, the termination of treatment involves a three-fold process:
1. To review the progression of ADHD and the clients’ expectations of the future.
2. To review past achievements and successes during treatment with the objective
of raising self-esteem.
3. To put in place methods to access social support outside of the therapeutic
environment.

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE

257

THE PROGRESSION OF ADHD
Different symptoms decline at different rates in ADHD. The course of the disorder
usually involves hyperactivity diminishing first, followed by impulsivity. Inattention
seems to be the most prominent symptom lasting into adulthood (Bramham et al.,
2005a). However, even when they no longer have a full complement of symptoms or
meet criteria for diagnosis, many clients remain partially symptomatic. This is known
as ‘ADHD in partial remission’ and, for some, symptoms may continue into middle
age. Thus, some individuals require pharmacological treatment well into adulthood.
Others may only require pharmacological treatment if their residual symptoms continue to cause them functional problems in some settings or circumstances.
There are three primary factors that determine the extent to which symptoms will
cause functional problems:
1. Biological change affects the symptoms directly, e.g. maturation of the brain.
2. Environmental change, e.g. the ability to change the environment around them so
that problems arising from the symptoms are reduced.
3. Psychological coping strategies, e.g. by the individual recognising how symptoms affect them and the development of internal techniques to manage their
symptoms and problems.
There is not much that the client can do to speed up biological change. Medication
serves to relieve symptoms but does not treat the underlying cause of symptoms. An
analogy is that spectacles help one to see better but do not change eyesight overall.
Similarly, medication has been shown to improve concentration and impulse control
(to varying degrees), but once the effects of medication have worn off, the symptoms
rebound. Nevertheless, there are methods that one can apply to influence environmental and psychological factors, and many of these have been introduced in the
Young–Bramham Programme modules.
Although most people gradually experience an improvement in some symptoms
with maturation, some people find that, although their ADHD symptoms no longer
cause them problems, they have difficulties due to the ‘legacy’ of ADHD. For example, some people experience mood-related difficulties due to low self-esteem. They
may find that, despite improvement in their ADHD symptoms, they remain caught
in a negative cycle of debasement and low self-expectations. They anticipate underachievement. Indeed, in spite of ADHD being a heterogeneous syndrome, many
clients report consistently that they believe they are not achieving their potential.
They feel that they have let themselves down and/or have let down others for whom
they care. Low self-esteem and poor self-efficacy will undoubtedly hamper an individual’s ability to succeed in our achievement-orientated society. In other words,
because people with ADHD have tried and failed at so many projects in the past,
they may begin to lose faith in themselves and believe that they will never achieve.
In such cases, failure is repeatedly reinforced by further failure. Successes are often

258 ADHD IN ADULTS
minimised, if recognised at all, and people with ADHD no longer believe in themselves. This is a negative cycle, where an individual fails because they expect to fail
and thus becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.
The sequelae of late diagnosis in adulthood are that the individual has lived and
coped (either functionally or dysfunctionally) with their symptoms and associated
problems for a very long time. Thus, adults with ADHD are likely to have a different
range of problems compared with individuals who have been diagnosed and treated
since childhood. Even when symptoms remit, internalised failure and learned helplessness may be interpersonally and socially ‘ingrained’. The misattribution of the
intent and behaviour of others, together with their own maladaptive behaviour, may
have become part of a cycle that is difficult to break. Traditionally, the psychosocial
adjustment process of ‘graduating’ from childhood ADHD has not been considered
routinely. Yet, these individuals often feel that they are ‘survivors’ of a syndrome
that has left them with significant personal, social and occupational consequences.
This is anecdotally known as the ‘hangover’ of ADHD. Once no longer formally
classified as suffering with ADHD, family and friends may be unsympathetic and
attribute current difficulties to motivational and attitude problems, with little appreciation that these stem from a sense of insecurity and lack of confidence. Graduates
of ADHD often need help re-appraising their place in life, their skills, capabilities
and opportunities. Once they have identified what they want to do, they will need
encouragement to put one foot in front of the other and take the first steps towards
their goals.

RAISING SELF-ESTEEM
People with ADHD often enter treatment with a chronic sense of failure stemming
from a mismatch between actual achievement and potential, and the belief that they
have to work harder than others to achieve the same outcome (Ramsay & Rostain,
2005). They may have developed a coping style whereby they react to difficult situations with avoidance or procrastination, often hoping that problems will go away
or sort themselves out. Through engaging in therapy, this may have become all the
more apparent to them, resulting in them eliciting a more complete recognition of the
severity of their problems and feeling regret about lost opportunities. It is therefore
crucial when intervening with an individual with ADHD that the therapist remains
consistently aware of self-esteem vulnerabilities.
Negative assumptions and expectations about the ability to succeed or simply cope
in a given situation are likely to result in the client avoiding situations and exercises,
particularly when they perceive these to be anxiety-provoking and unmanageable.
One of the most difficult challenges faced by people with ADHD (as well as ‘graduates’ of ADHD) is to improve self-esteem as the negative experiences of adults
with ADHD (whether symptomatic or not) are long-term and deep-rooted. This may
sound rather bleak and indeed the future will not always be rosy for people following

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE

259

treatment as they are still likely to encounter various personal and social hurdles.
Ironically, self-efficacy does not appear to be a problem and an underlying belief in
their potential (albeit often unmet) most likely forms the basis of the resilient aspect
of their personality (see Figure 1.1).
Thus, the experience of ADHD may be characterised as ‘the good, the bad and the
ugly’. So far the ‘bad’ and the ‘ugly’ experiences have been well described, but it
is essential to focus on the positive features of ADHD and how these may influence the future prospects of the ADHD client. Indeed, people with ADHD have
many strengths to draw on. They are often creative, artistic, witty and entertaining
individuals. The most important way forward is to establish an area of expertise in
which they can achieve by drawing on their specialised skills. This is often in the
form of creative flair such as art, design and/or music, but may also be more practically based, for example computer skills. Such ADHD strengths can be considered
as ‘islands of excellence’ that form the basis of a fundamental optimism and belief
in themselves. Such characteristics are essential catalysts in the process of resilience
outlined in the cognitive-behavioural model of ADHD presented in Chapter 1.
Resilience is the factor that helps individuals with ADHD stay the course. Indeed, the
motto or rule of people who have ADHD is the adage ‘if at first you don’t succeed,
try, try again’. People who do not try will never have the opportunity to succeed.
A negative self-fulfilling prophecy may hold for a short while when life seems bad
and nothing seems to work out, but then resilience kicks in. This may occur due to
a rigid obstinacy to refuse to head towards despair and/or failure. On the other hand
(and perhaps more likely), this may result from a process of alternative thinking
generated from a natural creativity, optimism, and interest in new and challenging
opportunities. The generation of multiple solutions and/or alternative possibilities to
a problem can mean that an individual has access to multiple opportunities of success. Thus, people with ADHD are life’s true entrepreneurs but in order to succeed
they must find a way of defining their own structures and boundaries.
Low self-esteem has been discussed at length in the Young–Bramham Programme
and the importance of improvement in self-esteem has been emphasised. However,
a separate module has not been included to address this issue because improving
self-esteem is so important that this concept has been integrated into each module of
the programme. Raising self-esteem involves reviewing the client’s lifetime achievements and drawing their attention to the achievements they have made in treatment
and evaluating progress and success. The journey will start, however, with the belief
that they can achieve. This means improving self-efficacy.

Review of Lifetime Achievements
In order to motivate the ADHD client to determine goals and strive to reach their
potential in the future, it will be necessary to review past achievements and successes

260 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 14.1 Top ten achievements
Exercise – list your top 10 achievements to date
1. Having Daniel and raising him as a single mother
2. Training as a nursery supervisor
3. Being featured in local newspaper for fundraising
4. P assing the driving test
5. Buying a car
6. Winning swimming competitions at school
7. Art work being exhibited in a school exhibition
8. Giving up smoking
9. Gradually renovating the house
10. Sitting exams at school and leaving with qualifications

to date. It is important to highlight the individual’s strengths and emphasise what
they do well. Often, people with ADHD are more familiar with their weaknesses
and what they do less well. The ‘top ten achievements’ exercise in Table 14.1 may be
used to draw clients’ attention to previous achievements that they are proud of. This
is shown for Rebecca, a 32-year-old client, who had a young son Daniel who was also
diagnosed with ADHD. This example is included on the Companion Website in a
format suitable for use in sessions.
The client should then be encouraged to determine goals for the future. Paperwork often
provides external validation of success, so future targets to enrol or become involved
with projects that will provide a tangible outcome are very helpful as these provide
clear positive reinforcement. In sessions, Rebecca drew up a list of goals she wished
to achieve in the future (see Table 14.2). This table is also provided on the Companion
Website in a format for use in sessions.
Once Rebecca’s goals had been identified, Rebecca was asked to suggest how she might
achieve these goals, given what she had learned during the Young–Bramham Programme. This involved consideration of how each goal may need to be broken down
into smaller achievable steps, as previously outlined in Chapter 5, on time management,

Table 14.2 Future goals
List five goals you wish to achieve in the next year
1. Become a qualified nursery teacher
2. Go to art classes
3. Buy a newer car
4. Refurbish the kitchen
5. Take up swimming again and obtain a life−saving certificate

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE

261

GOALS

Nursery teacher

Art classes

New kitchen

Organise funding

Find out when courses run

Look at magazines

Organise after-school care

Enrol for evening classes

Check showroom during sale

Register for part-time course

Ask friend for child-care

Contact odd-job man for quote

Figure 14.1 Steps towards goals

in Figure 5.1. Figure 14.1 shows the list of steps Rebecca determined she needed to
complete to achieve three of her goals (see Figure 5.1 on Companion Website).
Completion of this exercise, ‘steps towards goals’, helped Rebecca prepare for disengagement of treatment as she shifted her focus from supportive therapy in planning
and managing her time to self-management and planning for future goals. Additionally, the sessions provided her with a broader perspective; by looking both back and
looking ahead. When reviewing previous achievements, the therapist emphasised
how well Rebecca had coped in the past despite her many difficulties and encouraged future achievement based on what she had learnt during the course of treatment. Rebecca was also encouraged to include rewards for achievements at ‘step’
level in order to motivate her progress towards the desired goals. For Rebecca, it was
not long before rewards she had given herself in the past (such as a cup of tea and a
biscuit, time off-task, or a walk around the block), became less commonly applied
in favour of more process-oriented rewards (such as going for a swim, researching
local art classes). These latter rewards were more reinforcing as they made a much
greater contribution towards achievement of goals.

Review of Successful Strategies
During the course of therapy, the client will have tried out various strategies to improve
symptoms in several domains of function. These strategies will have been met with
varying degrees of success. The therapist should review the techniques that have been
implemented during the treatment and rate their utility. This, of course, may also
include strategies that the client has developed themselves and which have yielded a
positive (or negative) outcome. The exercise provided in Table 14.3 is designed to remind both the therapist and the client of which techniques have been tested and how
well they worked. It will also provide the client with a list of helpful strategies for
use when the intervention has been terminated. These strategies should be rated from
0 (not at all useful) to 10 (extremely useful). Table 14.3 shows the review generated

262 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 14.3

Review of successful strategies

In order to improve my …

I can …

How useful is this
strategy? 0–10

Attention

Make sure the room is quiet
Use earplugs
Switch off the phone
Use a cue card
Take regular breaks

8
6
4
5
7

Memory

Write a list of things I need to do
Always keep my diary in my pocket
Set an alarm on my mobile phone for
appointments

7
4

Time management

Break down activities into steps
Make a diary activity planner
Work out rewards

6
8
5

Problem solving

Module not administered

Impulsivity

Use the IMPULSE CONTROL method
Use double-check questions
Count backwards

Social relationships

Module not administered

Anxiety

Module not administered

Anger

Monitor how I’m feeling
Use the ADHD formula
Listen to criticism
Keep voice volume low

Low mood

Module not administered

Sleep

Stop sleeping in the day
Regular bedtime
Stop watching TV in bed
Make a worry list
Set two alarms
Leave curtains open

5
8
8
4
9
7

Substance misuse

Use decisional balance sheets
Use distraction and replacement
techniques
Challenge dysfunctional beliefs

7

9

7
9
3

4
8
5
5

5
6

by Graham, a client who had combined type ADHD, who presented with poor timemanagement skills, difficulties controlling his temper, moderate cannabis use and
sleep difficulties. (Table 14.3 is also presented on the Companion Website.)
By working through the modules of the Young–Bramham Programme, it was possible for the therapist and Graham to review which strategies had been used to

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE

263

tackle each of his difficulties. For Graham, treatment began with a focus on his core
symptoms including attention and memory difficulties, impulsivity and poor time
management. Graham had found that practical techniques and external strategies
seemed to work better than using internally driven strategies such as distraction. For
anger management difficulties, he found the ‘ADHD formula’ particularly helpful,
whereas applying volume control to his voice had been rather more difficult for him
to achieve but surprisingly effective in experimental exercises. Several behavioural
techniques had been effective in improving his sleep and a motivational interviewing approach to his substance misuse had helped him to reduce his cannabis use.
Graham found that drawing up the list allowed him to systematically review what he
had achieved during therapy as well as providing him with a list of a range of strategies that he could use in the future. Modules that were not completed were initially
left blank for this exercise, although, in the course of the review, Graham found that
there were aspects of what he had learnt that he could apply to make more general
improvements both intrapersonally and interpersonally.

ACCESSING SUPPORT
A long-term problem for people with ADHD is that they have encountered numerous
difficulties in developing and maintaining relationships. They find it difficult to pick
up on subtle cues which should prompt them to alter their behaviour. Unfortunately,
when interpersonal difficulties are pointed out, these are likely to be received negatively by an individual with ADHD, who is sensitive to criticism. By engaging in
therapy, a client may be encountering for the first time a relationship in which they
feel they have been constructively helped. In this way, self-esteem may be fostered.
Ending this therapeutic relationship is therefore likely to be difficult and lead to an
initial deflation in self-esteem accompanied by feelings of being unable to cope. It is
therefore important to spend time preparing the individual for the end of treatment
by devising a comprehensive ‘relapse prevention’ plan, which will arm the client
with numerous coping options when therapy is discontinued. This has been achieved
so far by reviewing what has worked during the intervention, what has facilitated
success for them in the past and emphasising the positive features of ADHD. The
final step is to discuss ways of enlisting help and support from family, friends and/or
other professionals.

Support from Family and Friends
Throughout this book it has been emphasised how important it is for clients with
ADHD to be educated about their disorder and thus be forewarned about the personal challenges they may face through their condition. The underlying premise
for this is ‘forewarned is forearmed’; that is, by being aware of and understanding
their own difficulties, the client is better equipped to anticipate situations when they
are likely to require extra help or support. A parallel reason for the importance of

264 ADHD IN ADULTS
psychoeducation is for the client to be able to educate their family and friends about
how they are likely to behave and react. Whilst ADHD should not be an excuse
for inappropriate behaviour, it is useful that family and friends understand that, on
occasions, such behaviour is not due to a lack of caring about the relationship on the
part of the individual with ADHD.
By identifying specific ways in which family and friends can provide support, and
also providing an explanation of why this is likely to help, the individual with ADHD
and their supporters can both benefit from mutual gains. For example, prior to being
diagnosed with ADHD, a client, Nick, was frequently criticised by his partner for not
shouldering his share of the domestic chores. Nick insisted that this was not through
laziness on his part, but through his lack of organisation, and he often requested that
his partner made him a list of tasks. This request made his partner even more annoyed with the situation as she felt that he should be able to recognise what needed
doing around the house without being told. Following being diagnosed with ADHD,
Nick became more aware of his inattentive difficulties and consequently his need
for structure. With this explanation, his partner was more able to understand the
origin of his difficulties and started to make specific work lists for Nick’s share of
the housework. At weekends, Nick worked through the list and ticked off each chore
as he completed it. The house became tidier and Nick had fewer arguments with his
partner.
It is not unusual for family and friends who have known the person with ADHD
for many years, to accommodate some of their difficulties, albeit in a begrudging
way. However, it is not necessarily helpful always to make allowances. Family and
friends are well placed to help the individual with ADHD look at a situation in a
constructive way. They might remind the client of how they had coped with a similar
difficulty in the past and help the client prepare for the future by talking about how
it may be overcome and/or avoided.
One issue that clients often raise is that they are unsure of the extent to which others appreciate how much effort they have gone to in trying to do the right thing or
trying to please them. Often, in spite of making a huge effort, the client does not
achieve exactly what they hoped for. Even worse, their efforts end up causing upset
or distress. In such circumstances, the client will feel angry (with themselves and
others) and low in mood, which in turn can lead to further difficulties in achieving
their quest for success. If family and friends are able to understand that individuals
with ADHD do not derive pleasure from being late, behaving irresponsibly or acting
inappropriately, then the client is likely to feel far better supported and more able to
cope with the knock-backs they will inevitably encounter from people who do not
share this understanding.
Whenever possible, family and friends are important to have on board in a treatment
programme as they can help the client extend what they have learnt in the therapy
sessions to outside of the sessions. They can continue to support the client when

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE

265

the therapy has ended. Additionally they may be helpful in monitoring the effects
of treatment and give positive feedback. Such positive feedback will become part
of a ‘reward system’ by providing positive reinforcement. Furthermore, they may
recognise times when the client has forgotten to take their medication and prompt
accordingly.

Professional Help
By the time most adults with ADHD seek treatment, it is unlikely that their ADHD
symptoms are the only reason for seeking help. Many people with ADHD have a
history of multiple presentations to health services both in childhood and adulthood
(Young et al., 2003) so they may have become accustomed to a help-seeking model
of coping with their problems. This needs to be transferred to a model that depends
less on mental health services and more on self-help and/or accessing community
support.
Of course, some individuals may require referral for more specialised treatment,
such as detoxification or rehabilitation of addictions, or a more complex pharmacological regimen. Thus, in preparation for termination of therapy, it is recommended that the therapist discusses the range of services available, the grounds for
re-referral, and states clearly how and when these services can be accessed. Waiting
lists are an obvious flash point for people with ADHD. Clients need to recognise
that, whilst it is clearly important for them to find out about waiting times and voice
their concerns or complaints if they are waiting longer than they would wish, their
desire for immediate gratification may cause them to appear unreasonable and/or
confrontational. Additionally, responding to their requests may cause further delay
in service provision.
Individuals with ADHD are also likely to have high expectations of the outcomes of
treatment as they will be hoping for a panacea that requires minimal effort on their
behalf but provides immediate gratification. When a treatment falls short of these
expectations, the individual may feel that they have (once again) become a ‘victim’
of services’ shortcomings and express their feelings in either general procrastination
or by making explicit complaints about services and/or individual service providers.
Such behaviours function as a projection or transference of their underlying feelings
of anger, frustration and rejection. This propensity should be counter-transferred by
reassuring clients about the future by preparing them to anticipate and cope with
difficulties and challenges. By developing these skills, the client will (hopefully) be
prevented from antagonising the people who may be best placed to help them.

Support Services
An important component of any relapse prevention plan is to determine sources
of relevant available support (e.g. learning support, vocational counselling, social

266 ADHD IN ADULTS
services, housing, etc.). Clients with ADHD may have difficulty knowing where to
start in order to find out information about such support provision, so the therapist
may need to prepare a list of available local resources such as the internet, local
libraries, local council offices, etc.
Resources that may benefit clients with ADHD who are studying include learning
support and assignment/examination dispensations. These may be particularly relevant for clients with comorbid dyslexia. Similar support structures may be available
in the workplace of large organisations. Clients with employment problems may gain
benefit from vocational counselling services. In sessions, the therapist can prepare
the client for this by drawing up a list of likes and dislikes from previous jobs and
determine a skills repertoire. This will help the client to reflect on what they would
like to do and where they would excel.
Before attempting to access local support services, clients need to make contact and
find out what the service can offer. However, individuals with ADHD may expect
immediate responses to their requests and if these are not forthcoming they may
become irritated and dismissive of the support service provided. This may fuel underlying negative dysfunctional assumptions that nobody really cares about them.
They are likely to give up trying to get help. In particular, adults with ADHD can
be particularly infuriated by services who have no knowledge of the disorder. Thus,
the therapist may need to revise sections of the social relationships module and roleplay appropriate responses to requests for information that may irritate them and/or
cause long delays.

Support Groups
Today there are numerous modes of ADHD support groups available, ranging from
face-to-face contact meetings to internet chat lines and networks. Gaining support
from others with the disorder is beneficial for many reasons. Indeed, the most important, yet most obvious, reason for joining support groups is to access peer support.
People with ADHD are more likely to be able to understand the experience of their
peers and find it both reassuring and empowering to offer advice to others. It is often
a relief for clients to meet people who share similar histories and experiences. It can
also be useful to share strategies for coping with ADHD symptoms. People with
ADHD have often developed specific expertise to accommodate their difficulties
and can provide advice regarding adaptive compensatory strategies to others.
Some people report feeling nervous in the first instance about joining a group that
requires face-to-face contact. They worry that they will not have anything to say
or be too embarrassed to speak. Also, people may be fearful that they may not be
able to concentrate. However, when running the Young–Bramham Programme in
group workshop format, these apprehensions seem to rapidly dissipate in the face of
shared understanding and experiences. One outcome is that the groups often become

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE

267

mutually supportive between sessions and group members are able to swap their
contact details if they wish. In some cases, some clients have linked up as ‘buddies’
to help support each other on a more regular basis.

CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has described the final module of the Young–Bramham Programme. In
these sessions, the client will review the past and look towards the future. For those
in symptom remission, the legacy of ADHD may outlive the disorder in the form
of low self-esteem and anticipated failure. The Young–Bramham Programme has
outlined modules and techniques to address these problems. The natural ebullience
and resilience of the ADHD client will considerably further the endeavours of the
therapist. People with ADHD are engaging to work with, in spite of a tendency to
procrastinate. They have great potential to make positive change and when this occurs it is a rewarding experience for both the client and therapist alike.

