SUBSTANCE MISUSE

When people with ADHD are being assessed by clinicians for the first time, it is recommended that the assessment includes a comprehensive screen for past and current
history of substance misuse. In cases of serious drug misuse and/or dependency, the
client should be treated by the appropriate service (e.g. drug rehabilitation service)
prior to treatment for their ADHD.
People with ADHD often experience a different route into substance misuse than
others. Use or abuse of substances (including nicotine, alcohol, cannabis, amphetamines and cocaine) is more common in adolescents and adults with ADHD than
in the general population because they may have misused substances in order to
self-medicate. In such cases, adolescents and young adults report a contraindicative effect of certain substances altering their functioning, for example, when taking amphetamines they may find that they do not experience the same hyped-up
excitement as other people and report that they are better able to focus and concentrate. They may smoke a considerably greater number of cigarettes as nicotine,
like amphetamine, is a dopamine agonist, which induces secretion of dopamine
in the brain. This can have a similar effect to psychostimulant medication and can
improve their ADHD symptoms. Other substances, such as alcohol and cannabis,
tend not to have the same reinforcement in terms of symptom reduction but are
used by ADHD adults in order to dampen down feelings of agitation to help them
feel calmer.
When health professionals work with ADHD clients who have addictions they often
voice concern about the prescription of psychostimulant medication to treat ADHD.
This causes anxiety regarding the potential for abuse, for example: that it will be
taken irregularly and in large doses; crushing, snorting and injecting it intravenously
for its euphoric properties; taking it to stay awake for long periods of time; to lose
weight; or sold for the recreational need of others. Whilst it is obviously difficult to
generalise and caution must be taken, studies have suggested that treatment with
stimulant medication for childhood ADHD does not increase the likelihood that

234 ADHD IN ADULTS
Anxiety/low mood

Use substances

Financial, social,
medical problems

Worsening
of ADHD
symptoms

Figure 13.1 Context of substance misuse for people with ADHD

young people will misuse substances in later life (Brasset-Grundy & Butler, 2004a;
Wilens, Faraone, Biederman & Gunawardene, 2003).
Substance misuse rarely occurs in isolation from other difficulties or stress affecting
the individual. Figure 13.1 shows how many of the features often associated with
ADHD that have been discussed in previous chapters can play a role in substance
misuse.
People who become addicted to substances find themselves going through a vicious
cycle, wherein emotional lability and/or low mood exacerbates ADHD symptoms
and vice versa. Both problems may independently or cumulatively increase the risk
that a person will use substances to bring (temporary) relief of their symptoms and/
or fluctuating emotions. In turn, and with increasing use of substances, this may
lead to financial and social problems, and/or medical complications. Such problems
may overwhelm an individual who does not necessarily have adaptive coping strategies, causing them to feel anxious and/or low in mood. This state can exacerbate
symptoms causing the individual to seek relief for their discomfort and engage in
the cycle again.
This chapter will review each potential substance of abuse likely to be favoured
by people with ADHD. Ways in which the therapist can best support and treat the
ADHD client who is engaging in substance misuse will be introduced, drawing
strongly on psychoeducation and motivational interviewing techniques to encourage
the individual to engage in a process of change. Specific psychological management

SUBSTANCE MISUSE

235

techniques are proposed for treatment and inclusion in a relapse prevention plan.
A comprehensive treatment plan that would be required for individuals who have
chronic and long-term substance misuse problems is not outlined comprehensively
here as this would require specialist rehabilitation. However, the chapter does provide a brief intervention to motivate change in individuals who engage in intermittent use of drugs and alcohol.

SUBSTANCES USED BY ADHD INDIVIDUALS
Nicotine
Nicotine is primarily derived from smoking cigarettes and tobacco, although some
individuals use nicotine patches or gum when they are trying to quit smoking. Many
individuals with ADHD smoke over 20 cigarettes per day and find it extremely difficult to give up. Nicotine is one of the most addictive substances of misuse. It is a
cerebral stimulant drug and hence provides some effect in reducing ADHD symptoms through its impact on the dopamine system. For individuals without ADHD, it
has been shown to enhance sustained, divided and focused attention (Kassel, 1997).
Indeed, there has even been research that suggests that nicotine patches may be an
effective treatment of symptomatic ADHD (Levin et al., 1996). The health risks
incurred from the long-term consequences of smoking are now well established
in medical research and include cancer, lung and heart disease. However, ADHD
smokers may be exposed to greater risk than their non-ADHD peers due to their
inattentive problems. This is not from a health perspective, but from a risk perspective. For example, ADHD clients are easily distracted/or forgetful; they may not
fully extinguish a cigarette; they may put their cigarette near flammable material or
leave matches within the reach of small curious children.

Alcohol
Alcohol is the most commonly misused drug in the world and yet it is frequently not
acknowledged as a potential substance of misuse, most likely reflecting its social
acceptance in many cultures. However, alcohol has a sedative effect and people with
ADHD report using alcohol to calm themselves down, which reduces feelings of agitation and restlessness. In social situations, they may use alcohol to overcome social
inhibitions or social anxiety, arising from a history of social gaffs and/or poor impulse control. However, due to their poor impulse control, people with ADHD may
find it difficult to regulate their alcohol intake; they may drink quickly and to excess.
When intoxicated, individuals with ADHD will be even less likely than usual to
regulate their mood, increasing the risk that they will become reckless and engage in
risk-taking behaviour such as dangerous driving or criminal acts. Whilst the sensation of intoxication can provide initial rewards in terms of apparent symptom relief,
a contraindicative side effect is that it may exacerbate underlying cognitive deficits

236 ADHD IN ADULTS
associated with ADHD. Heavy alcohol use has been associated with executive dysfunction and poor short-term learning and memory, particularly in the visual domain
in a general population study (Powell, 2004). Other health risks include chronic liver
failure, kidney disease and gastrointestinal problems, in addition to acute alcohol
poisoning leading to accidental death.

Tranquilizers
As with alcohol, tranquilizers are often used for their sedative effects in order to
calm the individual. Benzodiazepines, which are prescribed for anxiety, are readily available in many homes and Tamazepam has been reported to be the most
frequently abused. Barbiturates are now rarely used in the UK. ADHD individuals with sleep difficulties may be prescribed tranquilising medication, which is
highly addictive (see Chapter 12 for psychological treatment to help reduce sleep
problems).

Solvents (e.g. butane gas, lighter fluid, glue)
Solvent use is more common in young children and adolescents, possibly due to
their relative availability to these age groups (Uzun & Kendirli, 2005). Matsumoto,
Kamijo, Yamaguchi, Iseki and Hirayasu (2005) found that inhalant abusers have a
higher incidence of childhood ADHD than methamphetamine abusers. Inhalation
initially gives rise to a pleasurable reaction, but frequent use leads to problems such
as poor coordination, confusion and hallucinations. Adolescents who use inhalants
are more likely to go on to develop substance abuse problems with alcohol and opiates (Wu, Pilowsky & Schlenger, 2005). The long-term health implications include
neurotoxicity, in addition to alterations in gastrointestinal, respiratory and cardiovascular functioning.

Cannabis
If young people are going to use illegal drugs, then cannabis seems to be the drug of
choice. Anecdotal reports from clients suggest that they started to use cannabis as
teenagers and have continued to use it into middle age and beyond. They report that it
‘takes the edge’ off their ADHD symptoms; particularly their feelings of restlessness
and inability to relax. They report feeling that cannabis induces a sense of control
and well-being by smoking small amounts of cannabis throughout the day to reduce
symptoms yet maintain an adequate degree of day-to-day functioning. This is in
contrast to alcohol misuse, which may impair functioning. The major disadvantage
of cannabis for people with ADHD is that it exacerbates existing cognitive deficits
associated with ADHD, for example it has an adverse effect on attention, working
memory and time estimation. Excessive use may induce feelings of paranoia and
deterioration in mental state.

SUBSTANCE MISUSE

237

Stimulants (amphetamines, cocaine, crack, etc.)
Psychostimulant use in individuals without ADHD can produce an elevation of mood and
a sense of increased energy with reduction in appetite and sleep. However, lower doses
may ‘normalise’ the behaviour of people with ADHD as this group of drugs impacts on
the dopaminergic system, leading to improved attention and a reduction in impulse control
difficulties. Some individuals with ADHD report having used amphetamines regularly for
years prior to their diagnosis and receiving prescribed treatment with psychostimulants.
Nevertheless, notwithstanding the huge variability in quality and purity of the substance,
the disadvantages of self-medicating (either consciously or unconsciously) by using recreational drugs are that high doses of stimulants can make people feel anxious or irritable.
In addition, street stimulants can be highly addictive and people can develop dependency
very quickly. Withdrawal and cravings can lead to changes in their behaviour, such that
they may change from being talkative and overly friendly to agitated and irritable. In
some cases, clients have reported feeling deeply disturbed by feelings of paranoia, for
example visual or auditory hallucinations, in the context of heavy stimulant use. In such
cases, individuals will require close and regular monitoring if they are to be prescribed
psychostimulant medication, preferably on an inpatient basis.

Hallucinogens
Hallucinogens include ecstasy and LSD. These drugs may be used by people with
ADHD in their quest for stimulation and sensation seeking. Ecstasy is associated
with a sense of euphoria, well-being, increased activity and a reduced need for sleep.
Dehydration is a very common side effect and it is extremely important that users
consistently drink fluids such as water. However, ecstasy is commonly used recreationally at ‘raves’ or clubs, where fluid intake may be excessive alcohol. High doses
can result in paranoid psychosis, depression, anxiety and suicidal ideas. Ecstasy is
also associated with a rapid development of tolerance.
LSD is another hallucinogen. This drug creates the effect of visual distortion, disturbance in sense of time and increased sensitivities to colours and sound. These sensations may be attractive to people with ADHD, who are experimental in nature and
not afraid to take risks. However, users are particularly sensitive to their environment and a threatening atmosphere can create a ‘bad trip’. Adverse effects include
later flashbacks and panic attacks.

Opiates (heroin, methadone, codeine, etc.)
Some adults with ADHD have experimented with harder drugs such as heroin. Regular use of such drugs results in a higher tolerance to opiates leading to dependency
and addiction. Dependence withdrawal occurs 8–12 hours after the last dose, leading to symptoms of intense craving for the drug, restlessness, irritability, increased
bowel activity, nausea and vomiting. Withdrawal and craving, combined with an

238 ADHD IN ADULTS
impulsive temperament, may increase the likelihood of individuals committing opportunistic theft and violence to fund their habit. The prescription of oral methadone
is the commonest approach to the management of opiate withdrawal. If individuals
present with this level of dependency, then it is strongly recommended that the person is referred for detoxification. Only after this has been successfully completed
and the person has been drug free for a period of at least six months should psychological treatment for ADHD be commenced. Prior to this, it would be difficult to
determine whether symptoms relate to drug misuse or ADHD.

PSYCHOEDUCATION
Psychoeducation is a vital component of the process of change. It is important
that clients make informed decisions and are empowered to make choices. This is
achieved by the therapist outlining the model of the stages of substance misuse. It
applies techniques to assess the position of the client within the model, and evaluates
the risk of their behaviour.

The Five Stages of Substance Use
Substance use can usually be categorised into one of five different stages of use. Individuals may use several substances, each in different stages. Table 13.1 shows the different stages and describes the function or motivation each stage serves to an individual
with ADHD (this is also included on the Companion Website in handout format).
A characteristic of ADHD is sensation-seeking behaviour and a need for stimulation. The first stage of experimenting with drugs can fulfill these needs as they
provide personal gratification in the form of thrills and excitement. For example,
a client, Craig, described how he first began abusing solvents when truanting from
school. This arose partly because, by not attending school, he had more unstructured
time on his hands; he became bored and wanted thrills and excitement. He thought
he could achieve this by trying new experiences. He made friends with a group of
Table 13.1

The five stages of substance use

Stage of use

Motivation for use

1. Experimental

Curiosity; pleasure seeking; risk taking; sensation seeking; poor
impulse control

2. Social

Need to be liked; affected by peer group social influence; social
attitude; depends on availability

3. Instrumental

Used purposefully to create certain behaviours such as seeking
‘highs’ or using to ‘cope’ with stress and negative feelings

4. Habitual

The ‘need’ to use becomes more regular and frequent

5. Dependent

The substance is constantly ‘needed’ and misuse is regarded as
‘normal’ despite negative consequences

SUBSTANCE MISUSE

239

adolescents who spent time at the local park, drinking alcohol and sniffing glue. He
also started to steal items from shops. People with ADHD are unlikely to consider
the risks attached to taking a mind-altering substance because they do not think
about the potential consequences. Aside from damaging his health, Craig ran the
risk of being caught and prosecuted, but he did not consider this possibility.
The second stage of substance use, the social stage, may be particularly relevant for
people with ADHD as they may perceive this to be a way of making friends and
increasing their popularity. Drug misuse may be a means of integration with peers,
as opposed to being an outsider. The ADHD individual may believe that if they take
drugs, they will be accepted by their peer group (even if this is a deviant peer group),
which is a position to which they have long aspired. For example, Craig looked older
than his friends and got away with buying alcohol when he was 15 years old. For a
brief period he found he was very popular with his new friends who requested him to
purchase drink on their behalf. He believed he was accepted socially and spent time
with these friends in the park drinking to excess. When his new friends became old
enough to buy their own alcohol, they were no longer interested in Craig.
Once the individual enters the instrumental stage, the drug provides ‘positive reinforcement’. This means the individual feels rewarded by their experience of taking
the drug itself and this increases the likelihood that they will take it again. For example, many young people take ecstasy to stay up and dance all night. They have a
great time and do not feel tired, so the next time they go out late, they take ecstasy
again. This begins to become a problem when the person believes that they cannot
have a good time or enjoy themselves without taking the drug. Ironically, for individuals with ADHD, the positive reinforcement may be that they are better able to
concentrate and complete tasks. Their social skills may improve as they engage better
in social situations by resisting the urge to flit about in company or frequently change
the topic of conversation. For example, after trying speed (amphetamines), Craig felt
more confident and believed he was more capable in social interactions. He believed
he was wittier and that he engaged in a more meaningful way with his new friends.
However, when a person feels the need to use substances on a daily basis in order to fulfill routine functions, they move to the ‘habitual stage’. This can be a costly habit and,
for some individuals, this may be the trigger to engage in criminal behaviour in order
to fund the addiction. This may commence in a small way, and one that may not always
be considered as ‘criminal’, such as taking money from their mother’s purse. However,
in time, these behaviours may escalate and include petty crimes of theft or shoplifting.
As a young man, Craig used to make excuses and postpone paying his rent to allow him
to buy more cannabis and speed as he believed he could not function without it. As the
debts stacked up, he borrowed money from his friends, parents and girlfriend, intending to repay them on his next payday, but he never managed to achieve this.
The state of ‘dependency’ arises when an individual continues to use substances
in spite of negative consequences and they feel they cannot manage without it. For
example, Craig found that he was not able to get up in the morning to go to work after

240 ADHD IN ADULTS
a night of clubbing and poly-drug use. He avoided seeing his girlfriend because she
became angry with him for wasting his money and being irritable.
Table 13.2 provides a checklist that allows the therapist and the client to identify problems the client may be experiencing due to their drug use. Items that are endorsed
Table 13.2

Problems associated with substance misuse

As a result of taking … do you ?

Circle Y / N

Engage in verbally aggressive behaviour

Y/N

Engage in physically aggressive or violent behaviour

Y/N

Often feel irritable

Y/N

Often feel temperamental
Often feel frustrated

Y/N
Y/N

Feel depressed/unhappy

Y/N

Feel anxious

Y/N

Feel inadequate

Y/N

Lack self-control

Y/N

Have difficulty communicating with people (i.e. you feel people
misunderstand you)
Fall out with people

Y/N

Not look after yourself well, e.g. personal hygiene, pride in appearance

Y/N
Y/N

Engage in delinquent and/or criminal behaviour

Y/N

Have difficulty studying or working

Y/N

Engage in unsafe sex

Y/N

Self-harm (ideas or behaviour)
Have greater concentration problems

Y/N
Y/N

Have greater memory problems

Y/N

Lack motivation to do anything

Y/N

Have loss of appetite

Y/N

Have feelings of paranoia

Y/N

Have unusual experiences, e.g. visual hallucinations, ‘flashbacks’

Y/N

Engage in reckless or risky behaviour

Y/N

Experience employment problems

Y/N

Lack in confidence

Y/N

Feel dissatisfied with life

Y/N

TOTAL SCORE

15

SUBSTANCE MISUSE

241

Table 13.3

Substance, stage and motivation

Substance

Stage of use

Reason for use

Consequence of use

Alcohol

Habitual

Nicotine

Dependent

Cannabis

Habitual

I have hangovers
and feel low
I have breathing
difficulties
I feel edgy and
paranoid

Cocaine

Social

LSD

Experimental

Speed

Instrumental

I can’t cope in social
situations without it
I can’t concentrate without
it
It has a calming effect. It
allows me to get through
the day
I become more entertaining
and have more energy
I like the sensation of
having a trip. It’s exciting
It calms me down

I need more each
time I use it
I have panic
attacks
I feel rough when
it wears off

should be used as a basis for further discussion and exploration in sessions. A blank
copy is provided in the Companion Website for use in sessions. In time physiological tolerance to substances means the individual must increase their dose to obtain
the same effect or stimulation. Dependency is characterised by a state when the
drug/alcohol becomes a priority for the individual and no longer causes the desired
effect but withdrawal causes undesired effects. Short-term benefits (e.g. the ability to
concentrate) are replaced by an increasingly greater need for the drug.
A drug of preference is often augmented by the use of alternative or additional substances, such as an alcoholic ‘chaser’ drinking strong lager with spirits or poly-drug
use. In such circumstances, the individual may find themselves operating at different
stages in the cycle (outlined in Table 13.3) for different substances. Thus, when a
client with ADHD is misusing substances, it is very important to identify the substances they use, the stage of use for each substance and tease apart the purpose
each serves and the consequences of use. Table 13.3 shows an example of how the
therapist and client can achieve this to identify potential areas requiring intensive
treatment (see Companion Website for a copy suitable to be used in sessions).
An exercise to help the client identify both their goals for improvement and their
current vulnerabilities is to ask them to imagine a person with a drug addiction and
rate this person’s behaviour in the risk domains. They should then imagine a person
without an addiction and predict this person’s behaviour in the same domains. See
Table 13.4 for an example of the exercise completed by Craig (see Companion Website for a blank version for use in sessions).
Craig was asked to look at the ratings for each person and think about what they told
him. He decided that the better outcome was for the non-user and this allowed him

242 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 13.4

Risk domain exercise

Imagine you are observing two different people, one is a dependent substance user and one is
an ordinary person who does not use substances – say a successful man/woman in full-time
work with a family. What are they like? How likely are they to have the following problems?
Rate them on a scale of 0–4.
0
Not at all likely

1

2

3

4
Highly likely

Substance user

Non-substance user

Engage in verbally aggressive behaviour
Engage in physically aggressive or violent behaviour
Often feel irritable
Often feel temperamental
Often feel frustrated
Feel depressed/unhappy
Feel anxious
Feel inadequate
Lack self-control
Have difficulty communicating with people
Fall out with people
Not look after self well
Engage in delinquent and/or criminal behaviour
Have difficulty studying or working
Engage in unsafe sex
Self-harm (ideas or behaviour)
Have greater concentration problems
Have greater memory problems
Lack motivation to do anything
Have loss of appetite
Have feelings of paranoia
Have unusual experiences, e.g. visual
hallucinations, ‘flashbacks’
Engage in reckless or risky behaviour

3
4
4
4
4
4
3
3
4
3
2
3
3
3
3
4
3
4
4
4
4
4

1
1
0
1
2
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
2
1
1
0
1
1
2

4

1

TOTAL PROBLEM SCORE

81

19

Look at the ratings for each person. What does it tell you? Who would you rather be?

to reflect on his own drug use and where this was leading him. This process was an
influential factor in his decision to stop taking drugs and make changes in his life.

MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Encouraging an individual to make important change in their life involves the
individual acknowledging that they are dissatisfied with aspects of their life and

SUBSTANCE MISUSE

243

accepting that alternative possibilities are achievable. In order to do this, the therapist must encourage the individual to think about change as a process. This can be
likened to a journey that requires organisation and preparation. In these sessions the
client will learn about the stages of the journey, in other words the stages of change
and the reasons for making the journey. It is hoped that they will recognise that their
goal is to achieve a better quality of life.

Making Change
The readiness of the individual to tackle their addictions will depend on many factors, both environmental (e.g. all their friends being drug users; having to walk past
a venue every day where dealers offer them drugs) and psychological (e.g. having
insight into their problem; believing that they can function adequately without the
substance). Research has shown that people with substance misuse problems can be
classified as being at various points on a ‘transtheoretical model of change’ (Miller
& Rollnick, 2002; Prochaska and DiClemente, 1982). In this model, individuals
move systematically through a series of five stages in the course of resolving their
problems: pre-contemplation; contemplation; preparation; action; and maintenance.
Motivational interviewing is a technique based on the transtheoretical model of change.
It is designed to help individuals explore and resolve ambivalence to change and is
particularly useful in helping people in the contemplation stage of change, where the
task of the therapist is to help ‘tip the balance’ from ambivalence to favouring change.
Motivational interviewing engages the client in an empathetically supportive but strategically directed conversation about their substance misuse and has received empirical support in the treatment of alcohol and drug abuse (Van Horn & Bux, 2001).
Table 13.5 summarises these stages, which are also provided in handout format on
the Companion Website. The stages are likely to be recognised by the client, particularly with respect to where they get ‘stuck’ in the process and prevented from
moving forward. This is helpful to determine obstacles to progression.
An alternative to the maintenance stage is relapse, when the individual begins another cycle. Most people experience slips or relapses and have to go through the
cycle of change again before successfully maintaining change.
It is important to remember that these stages can be ‘cyclical’ with the client oscillating
between stages (and this may occur for some time). For example, the client may revert
back a step and waver between earlier stages by engaging in a stage of ‘action’ but
then relapse and misuse substances again. This may mean that they revert to a stage of
preparation or even contemplation before progressing further in the cycle. Being able
to stop misusing substances takes time, courage and motivation before a person can be
successful. It is far from easy, and working through the process of stages will involve
the support and encouragement from family and friends as well as the therapist.

244 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 13.5

Five stages of seeking help

Stage 1: Pre-contemplative stage
The core feature of the pre-contemplative stage is that the problem of substance misuse is
not acknowledged and using is considered to be more important than the problems it causes.
Individuals in this phase do not consider changing their behaviour as they do not accept that they
have a problem. For people with ADHD, it can be difficult to move out of a pre-contemplative
stage to a contemplative stage, as this involves a process of self-reflection and also because their
thoughts are often racing ahead so they are unable to stop and consider their situation or needs
Stage 2: Contemplative stage
At this stage the individual begins to acknowledge that they have a problem and considers
making change but finds reasons to justify continued use and/or does not consider
themselves able to change. This stage is characterised by ambivalence
Stage 3: Determination stage (sometimes referred to as the ‘preparation’ or
‘decision-making’ phase)
The individual makes a decision to change the problem behaviour. At this stage the
individual has the intention to take action to stop substance misuse but may be uncertain
about how to follow this through
Stage 4: Action stage
In the action stage, the individual will stop substance misuse and exhibit a change in their belief
system regarding substance misuse. The individual begins to modify the problem behaviour
Stage 5: Maintenance stage
After successfully negotiating the action phase, individuals move to maintenance or
sustained change, during which the individual is actively working towards continuing to
stop substance use over a period of months and years

It is important to introduce the concept of change to the client. This may seem obvious, but to an individual who has physiological and/or psychological dependency, plus
poor impulse control, this may seem far from an ‘obvious’ phenomenon. To encourage
‘change’, the client and therapist need to identify the clients’ future goals, for example
what they desire, and what they will plan to achieve. In Chapter 11, the importance of
breaking down goals into smaller achievable steps was introduced, such as for the goal
to get a job, an action plan may be to buy daily newspapers, go to the job centre, register with employment agencies, make enquiries about voluntary work, find out about
local training courses organised by the job centre or further education courses, etc. The
substance misusing client must determine not only how to motivate themselves and
achieve these steps, but how to do so without using alcohol or drugs. This often means
working with the client to improve their self-efficacy and raise their self-esteem. This
will involve determining the social support structures around the individual (including
those that may be undesirable and negative), what problems may be encountered in
achieving the goals and how they may be overcome. Table 13.6 provides a structure to
help the client identify reasons to engage in a process of change, who is likely to assist,
as well as identify potential pitfalls. The table shows the information completed by
Craig (see Companion Website for a format for use in sessions).

SUBSTANCE MISUSE
Table 13.6

245

The problem of change

Why do you want to stop? I want to stop using because:
Using speed is making me feel edgy and low
I don’t get anything done any more
I’ve lost my job
What do you want? My main goals for making this change are:
I’ve been evicted from my flat and I need to find a new one
To improve my relationship with Sarah
What can you do about it? This is what I plan to do to achieve my goals:
Action
When?
Look in local newspaper
Thursdays
Register with local estate agents
Saturday
Arrange a special date with Sarah
Saturday
Don’t go where the dealers hang out All week
Who can you get to help you? Other people could help me with change:
Person
Possible ways
Mum
Can store furniture, put me up in
short-term
Sarah
Doing things together away from
places where there are drugs
Arrange an evening with Sarah’s friends
Steve ⫹ Jan
Dave
Go to the gym
What might stop you succeeding? I anticipate possible obstacles to change:
Possible obstacles
How to respond
Going to a club or party where
Leave. Tell Sarah or a friend how
there are drugs
I feel
Sarah not trusting me
Reassure her as best I can and
stay off drugs. Ask her to help
Bad credit reference
Save up and offer to pay cash in
advance
I will know that my plan is working when I see these results:
Move into a new flat
No rent arrears
Manage my money
Relationship seems better with Sarah and we see each other on a more
regular basis

It should always be acknowledged that one of the main reasons why individuals continue to use substances is that they perceive it holds some advantage for them, despite
the disadvantages. Miller and Rollnick (2002) highlight that the nature of a client’s
ambivalence can be complex, and can comprise a set of pros and cons for each of the
options available. Thus, in order to explore ambivalence to change, the client should
be asked to discuss the positive and negative aspects of their substance misuse and
generate a list of advantages and disadvantages for continuing to use the substance.
Hence, Craig completed a ‘decisional balance sheet’ in the form of a 4 ⫻ 4 matrix
(see Table 13.7; a blank version of the table is provided on the Companion Website),

246 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 13.7

Decisional balance sheet

Continuing to use amphetamines

Making a change and giving up
amphetamines

Benefits

Benefits

Stops me from drinking
I like it
I lose my temper less often
I feel relaxed
I’ve got new friends I take it with

I’ll save money
Less trouble with the police
I’ll be able to concentrate
More positive influence on my brother
I’ll get more motivation

Costs

Costs

It’s hard to get up for work in the
morning
I can’t concentrate
I feel uptight and anxious
I think people are looking at me
Sarah said she would leave me
My mother won’t let me stay with her

I might lose my drug taking friends

which incorporated the costs and benefits of continuing to use substances, and of
making a change. It is imperative that the client thinks carefully about the impact
of the substance on their health, personal functioning, interpersonal relationships,
ability to study or work, and behaviour. Indeed, the therapist must guide the client
and ensure they recognise that the costs often outweigh the benefits. In Craig’s example, with guidance he generated many more reasons to discontinue taking amphetamines than continuing. Whilst these techniques may appear somewhat repetitive,
when introducing the concept of change repetition of the advantages is an important
positive reinforcer that should be employed in sessions.
Miller and Rollnick (2002) argue it is not a simple matter of the number of positive
versus negative factors that influence motivation, but the importance of each of the
factors. In some cases, the client will insist on emphasising the positive qualities of
using a substance and resist acknowledging the negative qualities. This may result
in them identifying just as many reasons to use it as not to use it. In such cases,
the client should be invited to weight their reasons in terms of importance. This is
illustrated in Table 13.8 when Craig was asked to assign an importance score (0–5)
to each of the advantages and disadvantages for continuing to take amphetamines
(see Companion Website for blank version for use in sessions). Craig assigned a
total importance rating of 15 to the benefits of taking amphetamines and a total
importance rating of 25 to the costs. He gave a weighting of 21 to the benefits of giving up amphetamines and only 4 to the cost of giving up. Thus, the outcome clearly
illustrated that the disadvantages far outweighed the advantages both in terms of the
number of positives and negatives, and their weighted importance.

247

SUBSTANCE MISUSE
Table 13.8

Weighted advantages/disadvantages worksheet

0
1
Not important at all

2

3

5
Extremely important

Making a change and giving up
amphetamines

Continuing to take amphetamines
Benefits

4

Weight

Benefits

Weight

Stops me from drinking
I like it
I lose my temper less often
I feel relaxed
I’ve got new friends I take
it with

5
5
3
1
1

I’ll save money
Less trouble with the police
I’ll be able to concentrate
More positive influence on
my brother
I’ll get more motivation

5
4
4
4

TOTAL WEIGHTED SCORE

15

TOTAL WEIGHTED SCORE

21

Costs

Weight

It’s hard to get up for work
in the morning
I can’t concentrate
I feel uptight and anxious
I think people are looking at me
Sarah said she would leave
me
My mother won’t let me stay
with her

4

TOTAL WEIGHTED SCORE

25

Costs

4

Weight

I might lose drug-taking
friends

4

TOTAL WEIGHTED SCORE

4

4
5
4
5
3

MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
Bellack and DiClimente (1999) recommend that once a client is engaged in treatment they should be taught the skills necessary to become and remain abstinent.
At this stage, therapy sessions should include behavioural skills for refusing substances, with emphasis on simple behavioural elements, such as making eye contact,
not smiling and saying ‘no’ clearly. Role-play is helpful in the treatment sessions, as
the overt rehearsal of skills has generally been shown to enhance treatment effects
(e.g. Kazdin and Mascitelli, 1982). The aim is for the client to learn a few specific
skills that may be used automatically, thereby minimising cognitive load for decision
making during stressful interactions.
Once the client has engaged in the action stage, they will be supported to maintain this position and develop the skills to resist temptation. This involves clients
developing the confidence to apply successful strategies to overcome physical
and psychological cravings. This may be achieved by employing methods such as

248 ADHD IN ADULTS
distraction and imagery; challenging and controlling dysfunctional beliefs; selfempowerment through the ability to embrace the concept of ‘choice’; increasing
self-esteem; the application of self-reinforcement techniques; activity scheduling;
and motivating social support, rewards and positive feedback.

Controlling Physical Cravings and Urges
A craving is when someone really ‘wants’ something and an urge is where they
‘do’ something. For example, cravings for certain foods can occur, because you
want to eat them; but you may have urges to eat certain foods because you feel you
‘must’ eat them. People who have urges feel uncomfortable unless they are able
to relieve the sense of wanting something. Physical cravings and urges are linked
with negative mood and/or low self-esteem. It is helpful to use distraction techniques to manage cravings, such as talking to someone, listening to music. Urges
can be relieved by replacing what is wanted with something else that is less harmful. For example, methadone is commonly provided in place of heroin for people on
drug rehabilitation programmes; nicotine patches can be an effective substitute for
cigarettes; chewing gum and drinking fizzy drinks may also help alleviate urges to
misuse drugs and alcohol. The client may have already identified techniques that
work; Table 13.9 shows the distraction and replacement techniques that Craig identified as having worked for him in the past. He also added to the list some possible
techniques that he could try out (see Companion Website for a version for use in
sessions).
The distraction techniques outlined in Table 13.10 may prompt ideas for the
client to try out. The Companion Website includes this table in handout format
and as a flashcard, which the client may keep in a wallet and use to remind
themselves of a technique they can apply when needed. For example, a cognitive
method to help the client cope with cravings is to teach them to say to themselves
‘stop!’ Train them to employ visual imagery to do this by imagining a stop
sign or a brick wall. They should then focus on their surroundings and describe
items in the room in minute detail. Once they have become less tense and more
relaxed, encourage the client to conjure up an image in their head. They may
wish to think of a positive image, for example a place where they have felt safe

Table 13.9

Distraction and replacement techniques
Substance: amphetamines

Distraction techniques that work for you

Replacement techniques to manage urges

go to the gym
play guitar
talk to Sarah and ask for her help
go for a run

drinking caffeinated tea/coffee
chew nicotine gym
take a caffeine tablet
have a glucose energy drink

SUBSTANCE MISUSE
Table 13.10

249

Distraction techniques

Focus on the external environment to distract thoughts from internal cravings – concentrate
on the trees, the grass, the people, the shops, etc.
Engage in some form of mental activity, e.g. mental arithmetic, crossword puzzles, reading
Talk to someone who is unconnected to the substance
Physical exercise, get out and about, e.g. take a brisk walk, visit a friend, go for a drive to
escape cravings
Perform household tasks to keep busy
Spend some time playing games, such as cards, computer games, board games, etc

and happy once before, such as the seaside, and focus on little details, e.g. the
sound of the gulls, the lapping of the waves, the sand between their toes, etc.
Alternately, they may wish to use a negative image, for example imagine what it
would be like to lose the house, family, friends, health, hurting the people they
love and having them feel angry towards them, etc. It may help to refer back to
the exercise in Table 13.4 when the client imagined a substance user and compared their life with that of a non-user, and incorporate aspects of the exercise
into the imaginal mode.

Dysfunctional Beliefs
Dysfunctional and addictive beliefs are very unhelpful and contribute greatly
to the generation of perceived uncontrollable urges for substances. Figure 13.2

Activating
situation
Feeling sad, lonely,
restless and bored

Continued use
or relapse
Smoke several
joints

Addictive
belief
‘If I have a
joint I’ll feel
better’

Poor impulse
control
‘I’ve found it
so I’ll smoke it
now’

Automatic
thought
‘Why not?
I can’t wait, I
need it now’

Focus on instrumental
strategies (action)
Look around for some
cannabis

Cravings
and urges

Facilitating
beliefs
(permission)
‘A few drags
won’t hurt’

Figure 13.2 The sequence of thoughts and beliefs during cravings and urges

250 ADHD IN ADULTS

Dysfunctional
belief
‘I am not liked’
‘People only like me
if I entertain them’

Emotion
sad
Anxious

Addictive
belief
‘Alcohol will
make me more
likable’

Addictive
behaviour
Drink more alcohol

Figure 13.3 Dysfunctional beliefs that can maintain substance misuse

demonstrates the negative cyclical relationship between such thoughts, cravings
and urges.
This figure can be used in treatment with the client by asking them to complete
thoughts and behaviours as appropriate using the blank copy on the Companion
Website. This will identify thoughts and beliefs that may be cognitively challenged
at relevant points in the process. Dysfunctional beliefs play an important role in the
maintenance of substance misuse. For example, a client, Katherine, believed that
she was only liked when she was being sociable and witty. Katherine formed the
dysfunctional belief that drinking alcohol made her more amusing. This reinforced
the urge to drink and created an addictive belief that alcohol made her more likeable.
The relationship between Katherine’s dysfunctional beliefs and addictive behaviour
is shown in Figure 13.3. A blank version is provided on the Companion Website for
use in sessions.
Table 13.11 gives examples of other addictive beliefs commonly expressed by ADHD
clients.

Choice and Self-esteem
Individuals who have travelled far in the hierarchy of substance misuse may lose
sight of the concept of choice and will. Clients should be asked to think back to a
time when they made the choice not to use and had a positive outcome and positive
self-esteem. They should then describe how they felt. The therapist should explore
what they can do to help themselves get back to this stage again. They should focus on the good qualities such as positive feelings, experiences and behaviours that
have occurred during their effort to stop misusing substances. This technique can be
particularly empowering for people with ADHD who find themselves at the mercy
of their impulses and incorrectly believe their lack of self-control means they lack
choice. This belief is a thinking error.

SUBSTANCE MISUSE
Table 13.11

251

Addictive beliefs

Taking drugs …

Example of addictive belief

Improves concentration
Reduces inner restlessness
Improves confidence
Increases in social functioning
Improves self-efficacy
Increases pleasure and excitement
Increases energy and motivation
Relieves boredom

I can’t focus without it
I can’t feel calm without it
I can’t perform without it
I’ll be witty and seem dull without it
I can’t achieve without it
Life is boring without it
It is the only thing that motivates me
The situation won’t be so bad if I have it
beforehand
I can’t cope without it – it’s the only thing
that makes me feel better about myself
I’ll go to pieces without it

Relieves tension, anxiety, and depression
Maintains psychological and emotional
balance
Improves social skills
Relieves craving
Justifies dependency

I communicate better and become more
extroverted
If craving is not appeased it will get worse
I am addicted so have no option

Self-reinforcement Techniques
Posters can be useful reminders of goals; that is, to reduce and quit using a substance. It may also be helpful to have an advantages/disadvantages table on the
wall or a list of distraction techniques that the individual can use as a prompt when
an urge or craving arises. A flashcard, kept in a wallet, for example, can be used
to remind the individual of the advantages of stopping substance use. The client
should carry the card at all times and read it when they feel weak and vulnerable
(see Table 13.12). An example that can be used for this purpose is provided on the
Companion Website.
It may be helpful to list on the flip side of the flashcard any coping strategies and
techniques that have been determined in the course of treatment that will help the
client get through the ‘risk period’ when they feel vulnerable.

Activity Scheduling
Activity scheduling involves making a structured plan to squeeze out risk periods
when the client recognises they may be vulnerable to substance misuse. Pay particular attention to times when the client is most likely to be sensitive to cravings,
urges and withdrawal. See Chapters 4 and 11 for further information about activity
scheduling.

252 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 13.12 Flashcards of self-reinforcement
I am in more control without it
I am less aggressive without it
I don’t want to hurt my family or friends
I look healthier without it
I don’t want it – I want it to stop NOW.

Social Support
It is essential that the client does not go it alone. It is really important that they
are supported and that they engage the help of friends and family. There are also
services that provide support and/or more formal treatment to help reduce excessive
emotional reactions, modify self-defeating behaviour and help change beliefs and
attitudes concerning the more problematic aspects of substance use. Some are local
walk-in services where the client can obtain confidential support and advice. Others offer more formal rehabilitation for addiction. However, the client will require
ongoing support not only outside of treatment but also following treatment, in order
to plan and prevent relapse. Internet support groups have also become one source of
such support.

Rewards and Positive Feedback
Rewards are a very important part of any treatment programme for people with
ADHD. Immediate rewards for success include giving themselves a pat on the back,
self-praise and/or a more tangible reward for periods where they have succeeded
in reducing or rejecting using the substance. The client should inform others about
their progress, so that they too can give support and encouragement. This will help
to boost their confidence and self-esteem. Treats, rewards, showing off and telling
others how well they have done will boost their confidence.

CONCLUSIONS
The process of change requires personal acceptance and once this has been achieved,
abstinence and a healthier lifestyle may be maintained by applying specific treatment techniques. Substance misuse is complex and ADHD individuals with sustained long-term use at a level of dependency will require specialist intervention
and rehabilitation. This chapter has provided a briefer intervention suitable for individuals who have perhaps long-term but intermittent use. Such individuals will
be suitable for treatment using the motivational interviewing technique outlined in
this chapter to wean them away from excessive use of drugs and alcohol as a social
crutch and/or the risk of damaging their health with unprescribed drugs.

PART IV

THE FUTURE

14
