INTRODUCTION

This book aims to provide clinicians with a comprehensive psychological guide to
practice when working with adults with ADHD; from the assessment and diagnosis stage, through to treatment of both core symptoms and associated problems. As
ADHD is a heterogeneous disorder, each individual is likely to present with a different constellation of symptoms covering a range of psychological strengths and weaknesses. For this reason, this book contains several stand-alone modules that have
been devised and collated to form the Young–Bramham Programme. The Young–
Bramham Programme provides an innovative and intensive practical approach to
the presentation of adulthood ADHD using cognitive behavioural and motivational
interviewing techniques, which are described in detail using case examples. Each
module is presented in a separate chapter of this book and can be used independently
or in conjunction with other modules.
Clinicians often report feeling under-equipped to treat this client group and that there is
relatively limited literature regarding psychological treatment. This is despite ADHD
adults seeking help for assessment and/or treatment of their presenting complaints
in increasing numbers. Approximately one-third of children with ADHD continue
to be fully symptomatic into adult life and the remainder often retain some residual
problems that warrant treatment. In addition, although the diagnosis of the disorder of
ADHD relies on a categorical perspective, many of the core attentional and impulsivity
difficulties are continuously distributed within the normal population. Therefore, there
are many individuals with attention, impulsivity and hyperactivity problems that fall
below the threshold for formal diagnosis, but who nevertheless may also benefit from
treatment of their functional impairments. Thus, the Young–Bramham Programme
is appropriate for individuals who have a formal ADHD diagnosis; individuals who
previously had a diagnosis and continue to have residual symptoms or problems;
and individuals who present with an undiagnosed constellation of attention and/or
hyperactive impulsive symptoms, and related problems.
Literature regarding pharmacological treatment of the disorder has been evolving
in conjunction with increased recognition of its longstanding nature (e.g. Horrigan,

4 ADHD IN ADULTS
2001). However, stimulant medication is not effective for up to 20–50% of adults
with ADHD as they may not experience symptom reduction or they are unable
to tolerate the medication (Spencer et al., 1995; Wender, 1998; Wilens, Spencer
& Biederman, 2002). Moreover adults who have benefited from pharmacological
intervention may not experience a considerable reduction in their core symptoms
(Weiss, Hechtman & Weiss, 1999) and they may continue to experience a number of
symptoms and/or associated problems more suitable for treatment with psychological interventions. Cognitive remediation techniques that target problems associated
with adult ADHD, such as attentional difficulties, poor motivation, poor organisational skills, impulsivity and anger management problems, have been shown to be
effective in improving daily functioning skills (Stevenson, Whitmont, Bornholt,
Livesey & Stevenson, 2002).
People with ADHD have often developed secondary conditions following lifelong
ADHD-related frustration and failure (Murphy, 1995; Young, 2002). Indeed, a
number of outcome studies have demonstrated a wide range of comorbid conditions
associated with ADHD including anxiety disorder, depression, substance misuse and
dysfunctional anger (for reviews, see Brassett-Grundy & Butler, 2004a; Murphy &
Barkley, 1996; Shekim, Asarnow, Hess, Zaucha & Wheller 1990). Whilst these conditions are effectively treated by psychological interventions for individuals without
ADHD, clinicians sometimes feel discouraged from intervening in the same way
with clients with ADHD as they fear there may be complicating factors. We therefore decided to write this book to share our knowledge and provide guidance for
clinicians who are working with adults with ADHD.
A second reason for writing the book was that we have talked to our clients and
listened to their life histories. This led us to conduct an investigation into their
thoughts and feelings about receiving a diagnosis of ADHD and their experience
of treatment with medication (Young, Bramham, Gray & Rose, in submission). The
results of the study formed the theoretical basis of the Young–Bramham Programme
(see Chapter 3).

THE COMPANION WEBSITE
The Young–Bramham Programme book is supplemented by a Companion Website,
which provides practical and pragmatic exercises that allow the client to identify personal specific problems and methods to address them. Strategies that involve writing
ideas down or making lists of potential consequences target difficulties in organisational skills and memory problems which are inherent in adulthood ADHD. The
therapist therefore needs to maximise the opportunity to create lists and structure
plans during sessions. Examples, charts, diaries, figures, diagrams and illustrations
are presented in both the book and on the Companion Website (the latter in a format
suitable for use in sessions) to clarify information, and/or to improve accessibility
and understanding of the concepts and issues presented. The Companion Website

INTRODUCTION 5

provides psychoeducational handouts and blank copies of relevant materials introduced in the programme. The materials can be downloaded, copied and used in
treatment sessions to determine, evaluate and treat specific symptoms, problems
and strategies. The materials will help the therapist and the client to collaboratively
tailor the Young–Bramham Programme interventions according the client’s specific
needs.

ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER
IN ADULTHOOD
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder was originally regarded as a childhood disorder in which the core symptoms of hyperactivity, impulsivity and attentional difficulties were thought to dissipate during adolescence. However, prospective studies
examining the long-term outcome of childhood ADHD indicate that the condition
can persist into adulthood (Brassett-Grundy & Butler, 2004a; Mannuzza, Klein,
Bessler, Malloy & LaPadula, 1993; Taylor, Chadwick, Heptinstall & Danckaerts,
1996; Weiss, Hechtman, Milroy & Perlman, 1985). Estimates of prevalence vary
widely and range between 3 and 9% of young people and 2% of adults are likely to
meet DSM IV diagnostic criteria (Shaffer, 1994). A high proportion of young people may retain lesser residual symptoms as young adults. A Canadian longitudinal
follow-up study suggested that up to two-thirds of young adults retain at least one
disabling symptom of ADHD (Weiss, Hechtman, Milroy & Perlman, 1985). Symptom expression in adulthood seems to change as the disorder progresses (Bramham,
Young, Morris, Asherson & Toone, 2005a, 2005b; Weiss & Hechtman, 1993). In our
investigation of clinical referrals to the Maudsley Hospital, London, we have found
that impulsivity and hyperactivity seem to diminish with age, but attentional problems persist into the middle adulthood years and beyond (Bramham et al., 2005a,
2005b).
It has been established that ADHD has a strong genetic component, with heritability estimates of 60–90%; that is, identical twins demonstrate greater concordance
for symptoms of inattention and hyperactivity compared with non-identical twins
(e.g. Thapar, Holmes, Poulton & Harrington, 1999). Family studies have also provided support for the heritability of ADHD; the risk of a parent with ADHD having
a child with the disorder is 57% (Biederman et al., 1995) and the rate of ADHD
among parents of ADHD probands falls about 20% (e.g. Faraone, Biederman &
Monuteaux, 2000a). However, the challenge is now for researchers to determine how
genetic susceptibility is translated into the disorder, through examining the relationship between genes and environmental risks (Asherson, Kuntsi & Taylor, 2005).
Environmental risk factors include prenatal and perinatal events (e.g. prematurity,
birth complications, mother’s tobacco and alcohol use during pregnancy) as well as
psychosocial factors (e.g. neglect, poor parental management, family discord, etc.).
In addition, neurobiological risk factors may also contribute to the manifestation of
ADHD, such as closed head trauma and lead exposure (Asherson et al., 2005).

6 ADHD IN ADULTS

Sex Differences and ADHD
Prevalence studies of childhood ADHD suggest wide variability between the
extents to which males outnumber females, with ratios ranging from 1.5:1 to 12:1
(Heptinstall & Taylor, 2002). The sex differences may relate to underlying biological factors as males in general seem to be more susceptible to neurodevelopmental
abnormalities (Gualtieri & Hicks, 1985). Further support comes from neuroimaging
studies, such as that by Ernst et al. (1994) who found that global cerebral glucose
metabolism in ADHD girls was 20% lower than in ADHD boys, although this study
had very small sample sizes. Furthermore, Castellanos et al. (2001) found fewer
structural abnormalities in the brains of girls with ADHD in comparison with those
of boys.
Contrary to the hypothesis of biological predisposition is the finding that girls with
ADHD have similar rates of affected relatives as boys with ADHD (Faraone et al.,
2000b). Additionally, there has been no difference between the sexes in treatment
response to methylphenidate and dexamphetamine (Sharp et al., 1999). It may be that
females tend to be underdiagnosed due to referral biases from parents, teachers and
health professionals (i.e. more boys are sent for clinical assessment of ADHD than
girls) (Gaub & Carlson, 1997; Taylor, 1994). Boys may be overrepresented in clinics
due to higher rates of comorbid conduct disorder and disruptive behaviour leading
them to attract more notice from health and educational professionals, and resulting in
more frequent referral for treatment (Biederman et al., 1999; Gaub & Carlson, 1997).
Whatever the difference, the sex ratio appears to rebalance with age. Cohen et al.
(1993) found that the prevalence rate for boys declines by 20% during the ages of
10–20 years, whereas it remains relatively constant for girls. This is supported by
data from the Maudsley Adult ADHD NHS service, where we found the ratio of
female/male ADHD adults falls from 1:4.3 in teenage years to 1:1.5 by their thirties
(Bramham et al., 2005a). A UK Cohort Study also reported a similar ratio of 1:1.7
for a 30-year longitudinal follow-up of children born in 1970 (Brassett-Grundy &
Butler, 2004b).
Sex differences have been shown to exist in several key domains of functioning
for individuals with ADHD. In non-ADHD groups, females have fewer attentional
problems and less hyperactivity than males (Bauermeister, 1992). However, in the
ADHD population, females are reported to be more inattentive and to have greater
overall cognitive impairment and language dysfunction. By comparison, males
exhibited increased motor activity, and aggressive and antisocial behaviour (Gaub
& Carlson, 1997).
There also appear to be differences in comorbid psychological difficulties. Epidemiological studies suggest outcomes for adolescent girls relate to psychosocial problems
especially disruption to peer relationships, whereas boys seem to have high psychiatric
comorbidity and antisocial behaviour problems (Taylor et al., 1996; Young, Heptinstall,

INTRODUCTION 7

Sonuga-Barke, Chadwick & Taylor, 2005a; Young, Chadwick, Heptinstall, Taylor &
Sonuga-Barke, 2005b). These findings are supported by Carlson, Tamm and Gaub
(1997) who reported that girls with ADHD received higher peer dislike scores than
boys, and with increasing age, girls were more often rejected by peers. The peer relationships of boys, by contrast, did not change over time and appeared to be more stable.
In adolescence, females with ADHD have been reported to be more impaired than
males with ADHD in self-reported anxiety, distress, depression and locus of control
(Rucklidge & Tannock, 2001), and to have a higher risk of substance misuse than boys
(Disney, Elkins, McGue & Iacono, 1999). An epidemiological 8-year follow-up study
of girls found that at 14–16 years, girls had greater state anxiety and ambivalence about
their future (Young et al., 2005a, 2005b).
By adulthood, these problems appear to become more ingrained, with ADHD males
reporting to be engaging in antisocial or criminal behaviour and females obtaining higher rates of psychiatric admission than males 10–30 years later (Dalsgaard,
Mortensen, Frydenberg & Thomsen, 2002). There may be a particular risk for
females with hyperactive subtype and comorbid conduct disorder as 60% of this
group received inpatient admissions for their problems.
There is a growing body of evidence documenting sex differences in the expression of ADHD and its associated problems that argues strongly for gender specific treatments. Females seem to experience greater mood instability, anxiety and
interpersonal problems whereas males seem to present with antisocial behavioural
problems, including verbal and physical aggression. The modular approach of the
Young–Bramham Programme is therefore helpful for therapists who may select
interventions appropriate to females (e.g. social relationships, anxiety) and males
(e.g. anger management and impulse control techniques). It is particularly striking that for people with ADHD, strengths and weaknesses in coping skills may
be contrary to those typically reported (i.e. females usually being more prone to
using emotional coping strategies and males tending to be more adept with problemfocused strategies). Indeed, female adolescents have been reported to adopt a variety
of ineffectual coping strategies (Young et al., 2005a). Thus, psychological treatment
needs to facilitate clients to select, develop and apply functional strategies to overcome their problems.

Learning Difficulties, Learning Disabilities and ADHD
ADHD is experienced by people throughout the intellectual spectrum. However, confusion may arise regarding the comorbidity of learning disabilities and ADHD due
to differences in terminology used between North America and Europe. In Europe,
the term ‘learning disability’ is used synonymously with the North American term
‘mental retardation’, whereas in North America, the term ‘learning disability’ is more
consistent with the European understanding of specific ‘learning difficulty’. Specific
learning difficulties are characterised by a skill, such as reading, spelling, writing or

8 ADHD IN ADULTS
arithmetic, being differentially affected in the context of otherwise adequate mental
functioning, i.e. the individual’s overall functioning is not globally low.
Some clinicians suggest that ADHD and learning disabilities are indistinguishable
(e.g. Prior & Sanson, 1986) and that the core features of ADHD are expressed as a
learning disabilities characteristic. Although it has been suggested that the disorder is more prevalent in individuals with a learning disability, even in those who
have severe levels of intellectual impairment (Fox & Wade, 1998), DSM-IV criteria
(American Psychiatric Association, 1994) may be more reliable for people with mild
learning disabilities compared with individuals falling in the moderate to severe
learning disability ranges (Seager & O’Brien, 2003). Others caution that ADHD
is difficult to diagnose in children or adults with a learning disability because of
the confounding factor of low IQ and the increased rates of challenging behaviour
(Young & Newland, 2002).
Psychostimulant treatment of adults with learning disabilities and ADHD seems to
be effective and well-tolerated (Jou, Handen & Hardan, 2004) but larger studies are
required in order to fully determine their efficacy. Guidance regarding psychological intervention with clients with comorbid ADHD and learning disabilities is very
limited in the current literature. Whilst the Young–Bramham Programme is primarily
devised for use with non-learning disabled individuals, this does not preclude use with
learning disabilities clients with ADHD, but several adaptations would be required.
First, attentional difficulties may be more pronounced for people with learning disabilities (Fox & Wade, 1998), which will further limit their ability to sustain attention in sessions. Thus, if possible, the sessions need to be on a ‘little and often’ basis;
that is, frequent, brief time periods, such as half an hour, twice per week. Second,
the primary therapeutic approach should be behavioural, as many individuals with
learning disabilities have difficulty in accessing and applying cognitive strategies.
Behavioural experiments in sessions, practical examples and simple explanations
are particularly important for successful intervention with this client group. The
therapist may also wish to recruit the assistance of a family member or carer who
can reinforce what has been learned outside of the session, as well as support homework tasks.
Specific learning problems such as dyslexia and dyscalculia have also been reported
as more prevalent in individuals with ADHD (e.g. Rabiner & Cole, 2000). As a result, some individuals may be assessed for their specific learning difficulties whilst
their underlying ADHD symptoms remain unrecognised for some time. Whilst there
is comorbidity between ADHD and specific learning difficulty, some individuals
find their learning problems appear to be due to the latter but clinical assessment and
formal testing indicates that an attention deficit is the primary problem.
There are three possible explanations for the association between ADHD and specific
learning difficulty: (1) attention impairments impede learning; (2) working memory

INTRODUCTION 9

difficulties can affect the ability to unravel complex grammar; and/or (3) both conditions share similar neurobiological underpinnings, particularly those relating to
executive dysfunction (e.g. Denkla, 1996). Indeed, frontal lobe systems involving
cognitive control are likely to be affected and can result in attentional and information processing difficulties common to both disorders (Duncan et al., 1994).
Individuals with comorbid ADHD and dyslexia may be under-represented in clinical
services because they have difficulty in completing screening questionnaires and this
deters them from following through referrals. Such individuals may be helped by having written materials relating to the diagnostic and/or treatment process presented in
an appropriate form for their needs, for example enlarged text using black and white
simple characters. Some treatment exercises may be adapted from written form to
verbal records using a Dictaphone and sessions may be recorded in a similar fashion.

A COGNITIVE-BEHAVIOURAL MODEL OF ADHD IN ADULTS
Based on our research and experience in working therapeutically with adults with
ADHD, we have devised a cognitive-behavioural model to formulate their presentation (see Figure 1.1). This figure is included on the Companion Website. It may be
helpful to work through the figure and ‘personalise’ the formulation with the client.
Due to their longstanding neuropsychological impairments such as poor concentration, forgetfulness, problem-solving difficulties and a need for immediate gratification, adults with ADHD are likely to have experienced numerous negative life events.
Such experiences include academic underachievement, occupational difficulties,
problems in making and maintaining both friendships and intimate relationships as
well as experiences associated with novelty seeking and risk-taking behaviours.
When faced with certain situations or tasks, such as social encounters, dealing with
conflict, or having an interview, people with ADHD may find that their neuropsychological impairments hamper their performance. Due to a history of failure, they can
be prone to negatively appraise a situation with a pessimistic bias. Failure is likely
to impact on their self-esteem; they may begin to doubt their own abilities, and in a
self-fulfilling prophecy, expect failure in the future. Following negative appraisal, an
individual may engage in negative behaviours such as verbal or physical aggression
or they may withdraw or engage in maladaptive coping, such as misusing substances.
They are likely to have negative thoughts and beliefs about their abilities and focus
on weaknesses. The combination of negative behaviour and negative thoughts or beliefs is likely to induce or worsen a negative mood stage such as anxiety, frustration
or anger. Being in a negative mood state means that an individual is more likely to
appraise a subsequent situation in a negative way, and so the cycle continues.
However, there is both anecdotal and research evidence to suggest that adults with
ADHD have an aptitude for the reappraisal or cognitive reframing of stressful

10 ADHD IN ADULTS
Neuropsychological deficits
Poor concentration
Disorganisation
Forgetfulness
Difficulties with problem solving
Poor response inhibition
Problems with self-regulation
Need for immediate gratification
Delay aversion

Life events/experiences
Educational failure
Occupational failure
Relationship difficulties
Social rejection
Risk-taking behaviour

SITUATION /TASK /
STIMULUS
e.g. Social situation
Confrontation
Exam
Interview

Resilience
Try, try again
Never give up
Self-belief
Inattention
e.g.distraction

Impulsivity
e.g. Lack of planning
Jumping to conclusions

Positive appraisal

Negative appraisal

Optimism
Self-efficacy

Pessimism
Self-doubt
Learned helplessness
Low self-esteem

Reappraisal
Cognitive reframing

Positive behaviour

Positive feelings

Creativity
Islands of excellence

Enthusiasm
Buoyancy

Negative feelings

Negative behaviour

Anxiety
Low mood and lability
Frustration and anger

Verbal and physical aggression
Withdrawal
Avoidance
Substance misuse

Positive thoughts/beliefs
I can do this
It’s not beyond me
I’ll get there in the end
I will manage this

Negative thoughts/beliefs
I’ll never finish it
Nothing ever goes right for me
People don’t like me

Figure 1.1 A cognitive behavioural model of ADHD in adults

situations (Young, 2005). It is possible that the negative cycle itself becomes a motivational force that compels change in a situation. A ‘Drive Theory’ was initially proposed by Hull in 1943. According to this theory, humans are driven to reduce arousal
or tension so that they may maintain a sense of comfort and equilibrium (Hull, 1943).
Whilst adults with ADHD may engage in a spontaneous process of reappraisal, this

INTRODUCTION 11

is likely to be negatively influenced by their cognitive impairments, resulting in the
process being dysfunctional or unsuccessful. Nevertheless, a cycle is re-entered by
the ADHD individual positively reframing the negative outcome, causing them to
try again in the hope of achieving success. This explains the resilience commonly
found in people with ADHD and suggests that this is underpinned by a belief in
self-efficacy. Therefore, the way they interact is associated with their ability to continually compensate and adapt. This adaptive aspect of the syndrome may also be
expressed as creative and entrepreneurial personality characteristics (Young, 2005).

STRUCTURE AND CONTENT OF THE YOUNG–BRAMHAM
PROGRAMME
The Young–Bramham Programme is divided into four sections: (1) background,
assessment and treatment; (2) core symptoms; (3) comorbid and associated problems; and (4) the future (see Table 1.1). The first section covers the background
issues regarding ADHD in adulthood, an outline of the Young–Bramham Programme, as well as assessment and treatment methods. The second section focuses on the core ADHD-related symptoms of inattention, memory problems, time

Table 1.1

The Young–Bramham Programme structure
Part 1: Background, assessment and treatment

Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3

Introduction to the Young–Bramham
Programme and adulthood ADHD
Assessment
Treatment
Part 2: Core symptoms

Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7

Inattention and memory problems
Time management
Problem solving
Impulsivity
Part 3: Comorbid and associated problems

Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13

Social relationships
Anxiety
Frustration and anger
Low mood and depression
Sleep problems
Substance misuse
Part 4: The future

Chapter 14

Preparing for the future

12 ADHD IN ADULTS
management, problem solving and impulsivity. The third section presents common
comorbid difficulties that can develop as a result of the core symptoms, including
social relationship difficulties, anxiety, anger management problems, depression,
sleep difficulties and substance misuse. Finally, issues around individuals’ expectations and plans for the future are presented in the concluding chapter.

Assessment and Treatment of ADHD in Adults
The Young–Bramham Programme includes guidelines for how to apply the diagnostic classification of ADHD to an adult age group, as most diagnostic criteria were
written with respect to childhood problems. However, given that many symptoms
of ADHD are typical of normal behaviour and are present to a greater or lesser
degree in the general population, it can be difficult to ascertain what constitutes a
‘symptom’. ADHD can be viewed as representing one end of a continuum, e.g. a category of impairment or dysfunction. As such, the identification of ADHD involves
an element of subjective judgement to determine whether someone falls into the area
defined as ‘abnormal’. From our experience of assessing adults with ADHD, we have
elaborated how each symptom may present in adulthood. We also outline common
hallmarks or symptomatic features of adulthood ADHD that may assist clinicians in
making the diagnosis.
Since individuals with ADHD are prone to developing a range of comorbid conditions, differential diagnosis and comorbidity can make assessment particularly complex in adulthood, especially given that the symptoms of ADHD are also present in
many other psychiatric disorders. Indeed, some psychiatric disorders can mimic the
core symptoms of ADHD and, in Chapter 2 on assessment, we suggest how these
may be excluded before a diagnosis can be made.
The diagnosis of adult ADHD is strengthened by gaining an accurate and comprehensive history of childhood functioning. Unfortunately clinicians often have to
rely on the memory of the client and/or family members for this information and
retrospective information is often affected by distortion. For example, some parents
may minimise their child’s difficulties or symptoms, whereas others may overestimate them as their memory has only retained the most serious and significant
events. Thus, the reliability and validity of such data is uncertain. We therefore give
practical recommendations regarding useful information sources for making the
diagnosis in Chapter 2. In particular, we evaluate the use and limitations of psychometric rating scales and the contribution of neuropsychological tests to the assessment process, and provide guidance regarding the administration and interpretation
of results.
The primary objective of the Young–Bramham Programme is to impart the psychological treatment outlined in Chapter 3, which can be combined with or used in
preference to pharmacological therapy. The Programme has two primary aims:

INTRODUCTION 13

1. Change from the outside in – to provide clinicians with ways of encouraging
adults with ADHD to change their environment and optimise functioning.
2. Change from the inside out – to provide clinicians with ways of encouraging the
individual to develop psychological strategies for adaptive functioning.
The clinician needs to instil hope and confidence in the individual in order that they
can make progress with appropriate treatment, combined with hard work and support. This perspective needs to be offered in light of the information that there is no
‘magic cure’ for ADHD. However, it is possible to change how the individual copes
with the disorder and to maximise individual strengths. We do this in the following
chapters by drawing on various techniques, including: a psychoeducational process
to inform the individual about the history, treatment and prognosis of the disorder;
motivational interviewing to overcome ambivalence towards treatment; cognitive
remediation to help control core symptoms; and cognitive behavioural therapy for
comorbid and associated problems.
Psychoeducation is a specific therapeutic approach that can be used from the start
of the diagnostic process (Jackson & Farrugia, 1997). The way that the diagnosis is
communicated to the individual is paramount to their understanding of the disorder and their future adjustment to the diagnosis (Murphy & Levert, 1995; Young,
Bramham, Gray & Rose, in submission). Throughout their lives, clients may have
been told that they are stupid, lazy and unmotivated. It can therefore be extremely
therapeutic and provide a sense of relief for the individual to understand that ADHD
has a neurological basis and their problems are not due to a character defect.
We introduce how to adapt techniques applied in paradigms of cognitive remediation, cognitive behavioural therapy and motivational interviewing for people who
are impulsive and inattentive, for example by introducing variety in treatment sessions to sustain focus and interest (e.g. shifting topics, visual aids, role play, etc.),
by introducing frequent breaks in sessions and by including a reward system. Individuals with ADHD are motivated to satisfy a need for immediate gratification and
it is important that treatment is structured to include regular immediate rewards
in addition to delayed rewards. Specific tools such as worksheets, role-plays and
exercises are employed to maintain motivation and attention. Shifts in topic and
the incorporation of a variety of teaching techniques (including practical exercises)
are attractive to individuals who have significant cognitive deficits, high intolerance
and a low boredom threshold. A feature of the Young–Bramham Programme is the
incorporation of practical exercises that will help individuals and clinicians identify
and treat pertinent problems, either core symptoms or associated problems.

Core Symptoms
Inattention, impulsivity and hyperactivity are the hallmarks of ADHD. In adulthood,
these symptoms are strongly associated with disorganisation, poor time-management

14 ADHD IN ADULTS
and inadequate problem-solving skills, and the Young–Bramham Programme therefore includes modules on these topics.
Inattention and memory problems
Attentional problems tend to be the primary complaint of adults with ADHD, who
describe experiencing difficulty focusing on a task and shifting the focus of their
attention as necessary. Some individuals develop compensatory skills to deal with
their inattentiveness, such as only obtaining employment where prolonged attention
is not required (Wender, 2000). For others who have not developed such strategies,
inattentiveness can impact on their ability to succeed in their adult life.
There are four facets of attention that are commonly affected in ADHD (selective;
divided; shifting; sustained) and examples of these in everyday living are provided
in Chapter 4. Attentional impairment can lead to many problems in day-to-day functioning, including difficulties listening, failure to finish and being easily distracted.
In particular, two types of distraction can be observed in individuals with ADHD:
1. External distraction, e.g. noticing irrelevant details.
2. Internal distraction, e.g. having the urge to do something more stimulating.
For adults with ADHD, the difficulty with sustaining attention may be the most
disabling problem as individuals struggle to engage in activities that are long, boring, repetitious or tedious. In contrast, when activities are particularly interesting
or motivating and/or involve immediate gratification (such as computer games),
individuals with ADHD are able to concentrate. Such inconsistencies can be difficult to understand for people around them and can be a source of tension and
frustration.
In Chapter 4 we also discuss how clients need to be able to recognise tasks that
are likely to be problematic and respond appropriately and adaptively. Methods of
adapting the environment to minimise distraction are outlined, which often involves
selecting the most appropriate surroundings suitable for success. Chapter 4 considers strategies for the individual to achieve their potential within the constraints of
the environment, for example by maximising their ability to sustain attention by
setting small achievable goals and introducing an ‘immediate’ reward system and
regular breaks within a time-management structure. Given that memory problems
are another common complaint in the context of poor attention, we also cover strategies for improving forgetfulness and poor recall.
Time management
Due to their attentional difficulties, poor time management and chaotic organisational
skills can be particularly prominent for people with ADHD and these problems may
become more marked in adult life. The ability to organise and prioritise is particularly

INTRODUCTION 15

challenging for people who tend to flit like butterflies from task to task, especially
when an activity is mundane, or when beckoned by a seemingly more important task.
Unfinished tasks are a source of frustration and leave the individual with a sense of
failure. People with ADHD respond well to imposed structure, particularly in terms
of scheduling time. Thus, Chapter 5 on time management presents ways of applying
a methodical approach to make plans by reviewing goals for a set time period (shortand long-term), listing activities, devising a schedule, sequencing and prioritising
activities, and planning breaks and rewards. We also include methods for avoiding
pitfalls, such as ways of maintaining attention on a task, ways of adhering to a plan,
advice regarding reviewing priorities and avoiding procrastination.
Problem solving
People with ADHD can have difficulty with solving problems for many reasons. They
may respond impulsively, which leads to rash decision making without full evaluation
of a situation. They may find it hard to generate multiple alternative options and
focus on, or expect, negative outcomes. They may additionally worry unnecessarily
about minor more immediate issues and lose sight of the whole picture. In addition,
limitations with attentional control may prevent effective problem solving due to
poor concentration and distractibility. We have therefore included Chapter 6 on
problem solving to show how, by using a methodical approach, clients can be guided
to achieve more optimal outcomes. The chapter provides methods to distinguish
between ‘problems’ and ‘worries’, generate solutions, consider alternatives, perform
accurate appraisal and avoid inaccurate and rapid decision-making processes. A
methodology for choosing solutions is introduced through the rehearsal of solutions to
evaluate consequences, role-playing appropriate scenarios and challenging cognitive
distortions. In addition, practical advice regarding setting targets and goals, and
evaluating success is provided.
Impulsivity and hyperactivity
Impulsivity in ADHD seems to be closely linked to a low tolerance of frustration.
This feature appears to be a stable and enduring characteristic of ADHD as well
as childhood ADHD. ADHD individuals seem to have a preference for short-term
reward and an inability to delay gratification, which can lead to problems with waiting. This means that people with ADHD may seem demanding or self-centred. In
addition, ADHD individuals find it difficult to consider the consequences of their
behaviour before acting. There are obvious social ramifications when individuals
present in this manner and they may appear to lack consideration for the feelings
and needs of others. The consequences of their impulsivity appear to be more serious in adulthood as poor impulse control, combined with a ‘short fuse’, may lead to
antisocial behaviour, aggressive and/or violent behaviour, speeding tickets, roadrage, traffic accidents and criminal acts. In many respects, ADHD may be regarded
as a potentially life-threatening disorder due to violent behaviour towards others,
accidental injury, (e.g. road traffic accidents), and deliberate self-harm.

16 ADHD IN ADULTS
Chapter 7 introduces self-monitoring techniques to identify situations in which clients are vulnerable to responding in an impulsive way, and determine the appropriate
self-restraint strategies they may apply in these circumstances. Stop-and-think techniques are introduced to maximise self-control, including self-instructional training,
the use of self-statements, and role-plays involving consideration of personal and
social consequences of behaviour.
Hyperactivity is the symptom most commonly reported to reduce over time as the
ADHD disorder progresses through the lifespan. By adulthood, hyperactivity has
usually considerably diminished and is objectively and subjectively perceived as an
objective or subjective sense of restlessness. Clients seem to dislike sitting still and
relaxing, and Weiss et al. (1999) have suggested that restlessness may be purposeful
and adaptive for adults with ADHD as it has a motivating function, e.g. it might motivate the ability to achieve more physically taxing tasks. However, feelings of inner
restlessness may also lead to relationship problems, as friends and family may feel
exhausted by the client’s inability to relax. In Chapter 7, we introduce methods for
the individual to capitalise on excess energy and introduce a methodology for structuring and organising the day to anticipate and prepare for hyperactive difficulties.

Comorbid and Associated Problems
There are several additional features of ADHD in adults that often present in
conjunction with the core symptoms, but are not necessary for the diagnosis (e.g.
Nadeau, 1995; Ratey, Greenberg, Bemporad & Lindem, 1992; Weiss & Hechtman,
1993; Wender, 2000; Young, 2000). These may be viewed as consequences of the
core symptoms of ADHD and have been described as the secondary characteristics or social and emotional sequelae of ADHD in adulthood (Young, 2000). These
sequelae include: impairment of social skills and poor interpersonal relationships;
anxiety; mood lability, especially frustration and poor anger control; a sense of failure and low self-esteem; sleep difficulties; and substance misuse. We have therefore
devised treatment strategies that can be applied to address these areas of comorbid
difficulty. However, the problem of low self-esteem is so common and debilitating
for people with ADHD, we have included this as a common thread that is implicitly
provided in each of the Young–Bramham Programme modules.
Social relationships
Disruption to interpersonal relationships is well-documented in the ADHD literature. Clients are likely to have experienced a lifetime of adverse interactions
with other people and a lack of opportunity to develop effective social skills. Core
symptoms of ADHD may be misinterpreted by others, for example a difficulty
maintaining a conversation may be perceived by others as a lack of interest or fickle
behaviour. Impulsivity may feature as a difficulty in turn-taking and social reciprocity. Some clients report a long-standing awareness that they are ‘different’ from

INTRODUCTION 17

others in some way, leading to feelings of rejection and social isolation (Young
et al., in submission).
It is important for clients to understand the relationship between symptoms and interpersonal relationship problems. In Chapter 8, we emphasise a need to develop
positive attributions and attitudes in order to improve social skills. We introduce
techniques to improve macro-skills, for example to increase self-awareness, develop
the ability to take another’s perspective and accurately perceive others’ emotions.
This is achieved by developing micro-skills, for example evaluation of facial expressions, posture, voice quality, gestures, non-verbal communication, verbal communication, conversational skills and listening skills. A crucial social dilemma for people
with ADHD is whether to disclose to others that they have the disorder and coping
with perceived or actual rejection, so we discuss this issue in detail.
Anxiety
Due to their history of academic problems, school failure and interpersonal relationship problems, generalised anxiety problems often present in ADHD adults. Social
anxiety may also develop, as one of the most commonly experienced sources of anxiety reported by our clients is when they are in group situations (either in unfamiliar
or intimate settings). Due to their uncertainty in such settings, they have difficulty
adhering to social norms and/or inhibiting inappropriate behaviour. Some clients
have such little confidence in such situations that they avoid them altogether. This
seems paradoxical given their often gregarious presentation, but this can be used to
mask underlying anxiety and a lack of confidence.
In Chapter 9, we outline how conventional Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT)
techniques may be applied and adapted for patients with ADHD to maximise successful outcomes. In order to address social anxiety and avoidance, we discuss how
to modify behaviour in varying social situations, including controlling the impulse to
over-compensate for feelings of inadequacy by ‘playing the fool’ and attention seeking
behaviour. We also introduce methods to re-interpret common reactions/responses to
anxiety by evaluating thoughts, feelings, behaviours and bodily reactions. A version
of the Clark (1986) cognitive behavioural model of panic is presented with appropriate coping strategies for intervention. Relaxation and breathing exercises are reviewed
and tailored for use in different settings. We suggest ways to overcome avoidance and
increase confidence by applying techniques of graded exposure, systematic desensitisation and behavioural experiments, and outline methods to evaluate success.
Frustration and anger
People with ADHD are likely to experience both trait and state anger. Trait anger may be expressed by feelings of general dissatisfaction and irritability towards
friends, family, employers and clinicians, especially if they believe that they are

18 ADHD IN ADULTS
misunderstood or negatively evaluated. Symptomatic individuals may be particularly predisposed to have an explosive temperament and express their feelings in
emotional outbursts. Clients may have developed maladaptive ways of coping with
their feelings of frustration and irritation. Indeed, anger is more likely to be expressed outwardly than inwardly suppressed, possibly due to poor impulse control,
emotional lability and a low boredom threshold. This behaviour may lead to negative
outcomes including relationship breakdown, termination of employment and involvement with the police. It is likely to be perceived by others as a negative character trait
and clients may be assumed to be unpredictable or in some cases even dangerous.
In order to effect change, the client needs to understand the function of anger. Reasons for becoming angry are often an unmet desire for immediate gratification and
this may escalate due to feelings of frustration and inner restlessness, which are then
inappropriately and impulsively expressed. Chapter 10 examines the stages of anger
from a cognitive behavioural perspective and focuses in particular on teaching the
individual to recognise physical indications of anger and learn when and how to
interrupt the anger process. In addition, ways of dealing with insults and criticisms
are presented to clients, including sessions to help the client recognise the difference
between insults and criticisms, appreciate constructive criticism and learn to accept
criticism appropriately.

Low mood and depression
Some people with ADHD may be predisposed to experience depressive symptoms
due to their history of negative life events and low self-esteem, such as academic
failure, relationship difficulties and financial problems. Their cognitive problems
may escalate the development of depression. As many ADHD individuals lack the
ability to plan, they are poorly motivated to start projects and have difficulty finishing tasks. This means that they may lack the opportunity to experience a sense of
achievement and mastery, and when things go wrong, the individual may rapidly
spiral into depression. Depression in people with ADHD needs to be taken very
seriously because of their lack of behavioural control, which may cause them to act
on an idea or impulse to self-harm. Once medicated, they may develop better insight
into past problems but ruminate more, e.g. with reduced distractibility, over past
failures and maladaptive interpersonal relationships with important people in their
lives. Their risk of becoming depressed may increase shortly post diagnosis and
treatment (Young, Bramham et al., in submission) and clinicians need to be aware of
the serious risk of self-harm and suicide in this population due to poor impulse control. Chapter 11 stresses the necessity of risk assessment in addition to the need for
regular monitoring of low mood and the impact of medication on impulse control.
In Chapter 11, we have adapted the Beck (1976) cognitive-behavioural model of
depression to incorporate the negative thinking and thinking errors common to people with ADHD. We provide suggestions of how to break the negative cycle and

INTRODUCTION 19

introduce techniques to challenge their negative automatic thoughts, reduce the
self-talk that perpetuates low mood and develop positive self-statements according
to ADHD strengths.
Sleep problems
People with ADHD often complain of sleep problems when they present to services.
Some sleep problems may be explained by core symptoms of ADHD as an incessant
feeling of inner restlessness may prevent people from getting to sleep. Other sleep
problems may be more similar to disturbance associated with affective disorders,
such as early wakening in depression. Sleep problems may also relate to medication
for treating ADHD, particularly following withdrawal of stimulant medication, or
drug holidays or changes in dose.
In Chapter 12, we review the function of sleep, describe the different stages of sleep,
and consider how the core symptoms of ADHD may exacerbate sleep problems such
as hypersomnia and insomnia. We detail the management of sleep problems, outlining sleep hygiene programmes and relaxation techniques adapted for individuals
with ADHD.
Substance misuse
People with ADHD may become involved with substances via two mechanisms.
Poor impulse control may lead to increased risk-taking behaviour, experimentation with drugs and subsequent addiction. A second route is when individuals with
undiagnosed and/or untreated ADHD use illicit substances to self-medicate. In these
circumstances, for pharmacological reasons, the drug of choice is likely to be amphetamine-based but alcohol and cannabis are also often taken by adults with ADHD
who claim they induce a sense of calm and relaxation. Chapter 13 describes the different categories of substance misuse and their relationship with ADHD. Psychological dependency is addressed by suggesting motivational interviewing techniques
to motivate the client to engage in a process of change. We present the vicious cycle
of substance misuse and discuss dysfunctional beliefs that may have developed for
adults with ADHD around substance misuse. The chapter also outlines techniques to
build self-confidence and cope with physical cravings and urges by applying distraction techniques, activity scheduling and motivating support.

Preparing for the Future
Many people with ADHD have negative assumptions about themselves and an expectation of failure, and it is therefore useful to explore how expectations of the self
influence future outcomes. Thus, in the course of the Young–Bramham Programme,
and particularly in our conclusions in Chapter 14, we discuss the influence of

20 ADHD IN ADULTS
self-fulfilling prophecies on self-esteem. We emphasise the creative, resilient and
flexible aspects of the ADHD personality and discuss how the client may have previously applied these characteristics successfully to achieve personal goals. Through
the reappraisal of personal capabilities and the application of techniques and skills
developed throughout the Young–Bramham Programme, people with ADHD can be
encouraged to develop a sense of self-efficacy and purpose.
It is important to impart how people with ADHD may apply characteristics adaptively to achieve success in everyday challenges, as well as working towards medium
and longer term plans. Unless this perspective is included in sessions, the therapist
is likely to have difficulty fostering engagement and developing a therapeutic alliance. We suggest, therefore, that the final module is always included to summarise
the techniques introduced in previous modules, and determine and/or reiterate those
which have been beneficial for the client. The module follows a relapse-prevention
approach whereby a plan to identify and manage ‘risk’ situations is developed to
support the individual and refer to when they feel vulnerable and are most likely to
slip back into old habits. The identification of periods of vulnerability and a management plan will prepare the client for their eventuality and increase the likelihood
that the client will respond by applying useful coping strategies and avoid impulsive
or dysfunctional responding patterns. It is important that these relapse-prevention
plans include a variety of options that can be applied as appropriate in a range of
situations, for example cognitive techniques, avoidance of troublesome situations/
persons, seeking family/friends’ support, seeking professional advice.

CONCLUSIONS
The primary intervention for ADHD is treatment with medication and this has been
reliably shown to provide a reduction in symptoms for many individuals with the
disorder. However, symptom reduction is but one treatment objective of adults with
ADHD, who have accumulated a host of concurrent difficulties. Our clients at the
UK National Adult ADHD service are positive regarding pharmacological treatment, which, they say, gives a sense of ‘normality’ and helps them to achieve their
potential (Young, Bramham et al., in submission). However, the level of satisfaction
is variable and clients have stated that medication does not resolve all of their difficulties. Furthermore, as the effects of medication wear off, the rapid emergence of
symptoms makes clients realise that this is not a ‘miracle cure’ for their problems.
Treatment with medication appears to help clients distinguish between problems that
are strongly associated with their symptoms and those that are less influenced by
the presence of symptoms. This means that clients become personally motivated to
engage in a process of change, especially with respect to symptoms and/or problems
they perceive to be resistant to treatment with medication.
There is clearly a role for psychological intervention for people who are diagnosed
with ADHD in adulthood in order to facilitate their adjustment and acceptance of

INTRODUCTION 21

the disorder. These individuals, as well as those who were fortunate to be diagnosed
and treated in childhood, also require psychological interventions to help them cope
with the psychological, social and occupational demands they will meet as adults.
The Young–Bramham Programme provides treatment strategies to address these
needs by applying techniques drawing from psychoeducation, to engage the client in
a learning process; motivational interviewing to encourage change; cognitive remediation and cognitive behavioural treatments to teach coping strategies and develop
skills.

2
