PROBLEM-SOLVING

People with ADHD have difficulty solving problems for many reasons. They may
respond impulsively, rather than think through a solution and its potential outcomes.
They may worry unnecessarily about minor, more immediate issues and lose sight of
the whole picture, in other words ‘they can’t see the wood for the trees’. This means
that they may find it hard to generate solution options. Past experience means they
may tend to focus on negative outcomes as these are what they have come to expect.
However, by learning to adopt a methodical approach to solving problems, more
optimal outcomes can be reached.
A ‘problem’ can be defined as any life situation or task that requires something to be
changed or resolved. In order to allow the person to function adaptively. The problem
may be explicit (for example, needing accommodation) or intrinsic (for example,
feeling unattractive). Obstacles such as novelty, ambiguity, conflicts of interest, or
lack of resources may prevent an immediate response or solution from being effective. Sometimes people may only begin to realise that a problem exists when they
have failed to achieve a desired goal on several occasions, for example getting a
job.
A ‘solution’ is a response or pattern of responses that can be cognitive or behavioural.
A solution arises through the problem-solving process and achieves a problemsolving goal (D’Zurilla & Nezu, 1999). Implementation of a solution is an important
part of the problem-solving process as this involves carrying out the solution in specific situations. Finally, solutions need to be evaluated as to their level of success in
reaching the set goals.
For individuals with ADHD, their problem-solving abilities are often affected by
executive functioning difficulties, e.g. a difficulty organising and sequencing information, and/or a difficulty inhibiting a prepotent response. Thus, their problem-solving
abilities are hindered by core cognitive impairments, such as deficits in response
inhibition, working memory and/or attention. It is important to assess the coping
styles of clients, both adaptive and maladaptive, as these will determine appropriate

98 ADHD IN ADULTS
problem-solving techniques, the hurdles they will face implementing them, and their
potential success. This chapter examines the problem-solving difficulties commonly
reported by people with ADHD, what is known about their adaptive functioning
and coping mechanisms and the stages involved in successful problem solving. The
model presented is a five-stage process that involves identifying and defining the
problem, generating solutions, evaluating solutions, implementing the chosen solution and evaluating success.

PROBLEM-SOLVING DIFFICULTIES
Specific problem-solving deficits have been investigated using neuropsychological
measures in order to establish their cognitive basis in ADHD (e.g. the Tower of
Hanoi and Tower of London tasks) (Riccio, Wolfe, Romine, Davis & Sullivan, 2004;
Young et al., in submission). There are several relevant areas of difficulty including
response inhibition, working memory and attention (see Chapter 4 on inattention
and memory).
Failure in inhibitory control when confronted with a problem may lead an individual with ADHD to respond before the optimal solution has been generated.
A difficulty in delaying gratification may also lead ADHD adults to opt for a
‘short-cut’; that is, an immediately rewarding solution, rather than implementing
a longer-term solution that requires waiting and more effort but with a greater
reward. Young et al. (in submission) explored these concepts using a Three
Dimensional Computerised Tower of London task where ‘discs’ and ‘rods’ are
presented on a computer screen. The participant is required to solve problems
of varying difficulty by rearranging a set of discs in order to make them match
a goal arrangement. It was found that people with ADHD did not increase their
planning time and were less accurate as task difficulty increased. Failure to
increase planning time with increasing problem difficulty was associated with
elevated levels of impulsivity. This suggests that impairment in response inhibition, or a tendency to act with less prior thought, can lead to problem-solving
failure.
Working memory difficulties and attentional impairment can affect problem
solving at several stages for individuals with ADHD. There can be difficulties in
generating solutions, as the individual may be liable to lose sight of previously
suggested ideas and/or become distracted. They may find it difficult to hold in
mind the advantages and disadvantages of solutions in order to weigh up which
is most likely to be successful. In addition, working memory impairments may
cause difficulties for individuals with ADHD implementing solutions as they may
miss out crucial components or muddle up a sequence of events. For example,
when solving the problem of getting a vehicle license renewed, they may go to the
post office without organising the papers and find that they have left behind an
important document.

PROBLEM SOLVING 99

Young et al. (2006) used an ecologically valid measure of spatial working memory,
which involved a computerised simulated golf task – ‘The Executive Golf’ (Morris,
Downes, Sahakian, Evenden, Heald & Robbins, 1988). This involves the participant
predicting into which hole the ‘golfer’ will putt a ball. The participant is given feedback as to whether their selection is correct or not. The aim is to avoid returning
to any holes previously selected. Performance can be improved by the participant
developing a search sequence, however ADHD participants tended not to adopt any
strategy at all, resulting in a significantly impaired performance. Furthermore, the
deficit became more evident with task difficulty; that is, when they were required to
process a larger array of holes in their spatial working memory.
These specific cognitive difficulties should be borne in mind when developing a
problem-solving intervention for a client with ADHD. Their strengths and weaknesses may guide the therapist regarding the areas that may require more attention.
For example, for more impulsive individuals, it may be necessary to focus on strategies that involve generation of multiple solutions in order to avoid them lunging at
the first idea which comes to mind to resolve a situation. Alternatively, for people
with inattentive difficulties, they may require more assistance in devising strategies for carrying out solutions without deviating from their planned and desired
course.

COPING STRATEGIES IN ADULT ADHD
Adults with ADHD have been shown to use maladaptive coping strategies, such
as confrontation, escape-avoidance and less planned problem-solving than individuals without ADHD (Young, 2005). This study also found that the way ADHD
adults coped with stressful situations was determined by their cognitive ability.
Indeed, impairment in executive function may lead an individual to lack flexibility
in their ability to access and utilise a repertoire of appropriate coping strategies.
For example, difficulties with impulse control may lead clients to cope with problems by responding rapidly and without thinking; this may mean they react in an
aggressive or defensive way. They may find it difficult to employ problem-focused
strategies if they feel emotionally overwhelmed by anger or anxiety, which in turn
drives them to act out their feelings. Alternatively, due to previous adverse experiences and attentional difficulties, some individuals with ADHD may respond to
stress or problems by not acknowledging the problem or actively avoiding dealing
with it.
The coping strategies employed by adults with ADHD may also be affected by a
lack of intimate, confiding, relationships as social support can act as a stress-buffer.
Close, supportive interpersonal relationships provide the opportunity to consult about
problems, gain helpful advice, benefit from the experience of others, and learn from
the modelling of successful and unsuccessful coping mechanisms. However, ‘words
of wisdom’ and the observation of adaptive functioning may be less accessible to

100 ADHD IN ADULTS
individuals who experience multiple short-term interpersonal relationships, find it
difficult to sustain relationships with acquaintances and old friends and may have
strained relations with family members.
The individual’s style of adaptive functioning will determine the outcome of a
problem solution, in other words, its success and viability. A functional coping
style provides the context for the generation and implementation of optimal solutions. A dysfunctional coping style can negatively affect the quality and suitability
of solutions generated and may lead to inappropriate decision making. According
to the Lazarus and Folkman (1984) model of coping, stress depends on a person’s
cognitive appraisal of a situation and their perceptions of their resources to deal
with it. They suggest that feelings of stress can be relieved through both emotion-focused coping and instrumental problem-solving. Emotion-focused coping
is used when the aim is to manage the emotions that are generated by a situation,
for example, a death in the family or the end of a relationship. Problem-solving
is used as a general coping strategy in situations that are perceived as changeable
or controllable. Problem solving can affect a person’s sense of control and change
their negative appraisal of situations. A functional response to stress involves
the ability to use emotion-focused coping and problem-solving in the appropriate
situations.
There are gender differences in the likelihood of whether emotion-focused or problem-focused coping strategies are employed. Females are more likely to engage
in emotion-focused coping, whereas men are more likely to use problem-focused
coping. However, when people have ADHD, it seems that these are the exact areas
in which the individuals of different genders need the most help. Females with
ADHD often have emotion-related difficulties, such as anxiety and mood lability,
which can impact on their ability to cope with stressful situations. Additionally,
adolescent females have been shown to be less likely to confide in peers and use
social support, which is a common resource used by young people (Young et al.,
2005b). On the other hand, males with ADHD are more likely to externalise their
distress and respond impulsively with aggressive or antisocial behaviour, rather
than engaging in adaptive problem-solving. For these reasons, it is important to
begin treatment with psychoeducation regarding when each type of coping may
be more appropriate, and follow this through with teaching effective skills and
techniques.
If a client is in a situation that is entirely beyond their control (and the therapist needs
to check whether this perception is prone to cognitive distortion, such as catastrophising the problem), then emotion-focused strategies may be most suitable to help
the client manage their feelings. These may include simple counselling or sharing of
a difficulty with a friend, but may extend to mood-focused strategies such as those
provided in Chapters 9 (Anxiety), 10 (Frustration and Anger) and 11 (Low Mood).
However, situations that are within the control of the individual can be addressed
using the five-stage model of problem solving provided below.

PROBLEM SOLVING 101

FIVE STAGES OF PROBLEM-SOLVING
Individuals of both genders can benefit from learning to apply an instrumental and
structured method of analysing and resolving their problems. This involves adopting
a five-stage process:
1. identifying and defining the specific problem
2. generating various solutions to the problem
3. evaluating each solution
4. implementing the chosen solution
5. evaluating success.

Stage 1: Identifying and Defining the Problem
Problems may creep up on individuals with ADHD or suddenly occur unexpectedly.
They may be external obstacles to a goal that arise as part of a natural process (e.g. being
unable to purchase materials to complete a task as the shop is out of stock); they may
be the result of actions or interference by others, both positive and negative (e.g. a work
colleague is off sick for a week and the client has to cover his work-load); they may also
be self-generated and build up through worry (e.g. ‘my boss hates me’, ‘I’m hopeless at
parties’). Common areas for problems for people with ADHD are given in Table 6.1.
However, the client may need some prompting and assistance in teasing out the presenting problem. This can be achieved by asking four main questions in order to
determine whether the individual has a ‘solvable’ problem or more general worries
and anxieties. These questions have been included in an exercise format on the
Table 6.1

Common domains of problems in ADHD

Work
Transport
Financial
Lack of support
Household chores
Relationships
Low self-esteem
Sleep
Disorganisation
Substance misuse
Trouble with police

Underachievement at work, being passed over for promotion, not
meeting sales targets
Missing trains, buses, being late, taxing, insuring and organising
MOT for a car
Debts due to not paying bills on time, impulsive spending
Gaining appropriate support, e.g. setting up childcare arrangements,
not accessing appropriate benefits
Incomplete DIY tasks, putting off cleaning and laundry
Difficulty making or maintaining relationships, argumentative with
friends
Feeling like a failure, expectancy of failure
Restlessness, insomnia, difficulty geting out of bed on time
Disorganisation of time, time-wasting traps, day lacking structure,
poor work–leisure time balance
Drug and alcohol addictions, use of substances as a maladaptive
coping strategy
Opportunistic crime, aggressive outbursts, damage to property

102 ADHD IN ADULTS
Companion Website (Exercise 6.1). The questions will help determine whether the
problem really needs tackling. If the problem derives more from a client’s general
attitude or anxious response-style, then the techniques outlined in Chapter 9 on coping with anxiety will be of help.
1. Why it is a problem?
2. How does it affect the client?
3. Does the situation have potential for change?
4. What could happen if it is not solved?
For example, take the case of Alex, a client with ADHD. Alex started a new relationship and was unsure whether to tell his girlfriend, Joanne, that he had ADHD.
1. Why was it a problem? Alex often had to take medication when he was with
Joanne and did this in secret. If they were together when his medication wore off,
he sometimes felt a bit ‘ragged’ and irritable.
2. How did it affect the client? Alex was worried about how Joanne would react if
she knew. He didn’t want to lie to her but he was worried that she would think he
was crazy and/or be embarrassed by him taking medication.
3. Did the situation have potential for change? If Joanne knew about Alex having
ADHD and was OK about it, Alex would feel very relieved. Alex believed they
would have a firmer, more honest foundation on which to build their relationship.
The downside was that they might split up if Joanne wasn’t OK with it.
4. What could happen if the problem was not solved? The relationship would not
have an open and honest foundation. If Joanne found out by someone else telling
her, she might feel angry with Alex and feel that he cannot be trusted.
This example illustrates that problems are often complex. They are not straightforward
or simple to resolve. If they were, they would not be a problem! Thus, part of the
problem-solving process is investigation. Finding out as much as possible about the
problem and how it has arisen will provide the client with the knowledge to find
the appropriate solution and give them the self-confidence to implement it. This
involves not only gathering facts related to the task itself but also examination of
personal information, for example self-expectations and demands. Hence, if a person sets unrealistic, unachievable goals, then the problem is not the failure to achieve
set goals, but the inability to realistically acknowledge their capabilities and skills,
time-management problems, perfectionist attitude, etc.
Three questions can be asked in order to assist with understanding the problem:
1. What is the problem or situation?
2. What do I want?
3. What are the obstacles to getting what I want?
An example is provided in Table 6.2, which demonstrates how, by adopting this
systematic methodology, problems may become more clearly defined and easier to
understand. A blank version is on the Companion Website.

PROBLEM SOLVING 103
Table 6.2

Understanding the problem
Problem list
I am unsure
whether to tell
girlfriend about
ADHD

I am often
late for
work

I have been given
notice to move out
of my flat

I have fallen
out with a
friend

1. What
is the
problem/
situation?

Whether
or not to
disclose

Usually
20⫺30
minutes
late

Need to find
somewhere to
live within one
month

My friend
has stopped
contacting
me since
I blurted
out a
confidence

2. What do I
want?

That she
knows
and feels
comfortable/
accepts my
diagnosis

On time
or 10
minutes
early

Find new
accommodation
in next fortnight

Being in
touch with
my friend
again

3. What
are the
obstacles to
getting what
I want?

Finding the
right moment

Difficulty
getting up
early

Going away for
weekend next
week

Pride

Transport
delays

Raising deposit

Finding the
right way to
say it
She may
reject me

Fear of
rejection

Worries about
having to live
with strangers

Stage 2: Generating Solutions
The best way of generating solutions is to brainstorm all the possible ways of solving
the problem. There are three basic rules for generating alternative solutions through
brainstorming (D’Zurilla & Nezu, 1999):
1. Quantity leads to quality, i.e. the more solutions that are produced, the more good
quality ideas there will be.
2. Deferment of judgement, i.e. the person needs to wait to choose a solution in order
to generate better quality solutions at this stage.
3. Variety, i.e. the greater the range of solutions, the more likely a good solution will
be generated. Thinking more laterally may prevent the person from choosing a
well-tried but unsuccessful approach.
Thus the client should be encouraged to produce ideas including extreme solutions ranging from the sublime to the ridiculous. Figure 6.1 shows the solutions

104 ADHD IN ADULTS

Tell her I am
terminally ill,
then say it’s
only ADHD so
it’s not so bad!

Don’t answer
her calls

Get
someone
else to tell
her

Tell
her I’m
mad!

Run off
with her
best friend
PROBLEM:
telling Joanne
that I have
ADHD

Change my
name to
ADHD

Don’t tell
her

Leave my
tablets out so
she works it
out

See if she
can guess

Leave the
country

Make a
joke of it

Sit down
and tell her
sensibly

Figure 6.1 Example of brainstorming solutions

generated by Alex when he was brainstorming ideas regarding whether to tell his
girlfriend that he has ADHD. A common obstacle to generating creative solutions
is ‘habits’ (Parnes, Noller & Biondi, 1977). Habits hinder problem solving by causing clients to respond automatically and in a way to which they have become accustomed. Individuals with ADHD may well have a history of habitual and impulsive
responding resulting in the development of ‘maladaptive habits’. These become
maladaptive coping strategies. For example, a client may habitually respond to a
situation that is perceived to be threatening in some way by storming out and failing to address the problem.
Whenever Alex prepared himself to tell his girlfriend he had ADHD, he would become anxious and start an argument. The argument distracted him from following through his intention to disclose to her his ADHD status. Such habits may be
helpfully identified collaboratively in sessions so that the client may recognise them
when they occur and resist the impulse to automatically respond in a predetermined
pattern of thinking or behaving.
One of the most helpful methods in solving problems, and one which is often
overlooked by adults with ADHD, is simply reviewing the previous solutions
they have applied to similar problems. The client should be encouraged to think
about how they usually tackle problems and what has worked (or not worked)

PROBLEM SOLVING 105

in the past. They should also evaluate the methods by which they have successfully avoided problems in the past. This will involve engaging the client in a
cost-benefit analysis of previous decision-making processes. Clients should be
encouraged to think not only about what and who helped in the past, but also
what made things worse. They need to identify the process, how they arrived at
the decision, and whether this had a positive or negative outcome. They may also
seek the advice of someone who has known them encounter similar situations in
the past who may be more objective regarding what worked and what was less
helpful.
For example, Alex was asked to consider what had happened in the past when he had
told friends and girlfriends that he has ADHD. When he told his first girlfriend and
their friends in the pub, they had laughed and thanked him for letting them know.
His best friend asked if there was anything he could do to help. His friend asked him
a lot of questions about the disorder. A few weeks later he and his girlfriend split up
as she was due to go travelling. His mother told family members that he had ADHD,
some of whom did not seem to grasp the nature of the disorder. One aunt sent him a
‘Get Well Soon’ card. From this experience, Alex decided that it would be better if
he provided his own explanation of his condition.

Stage 3: Evaluating Solutions
So far the client will have learnt to identify and define problems and generate
multiple alternative solutions. Once several solutions have been generated, these
should be assessed according to the degree of satisfaction the client would feel with
the outcome of each solution. Several methods are recommended to assist with this
process, including evaluating effort, examining alternatives, rehearsal of the solution, role-play and challenging cognitive distortions.

Evaluating effort
People with ADHD may avoid adaptive problem-solving when the effort involved in
carrying out a solution is perceived to be too great. A desire for immediate gratification means that a short cut may be more rewarding than the alternative of expending
more effort to achieve a greater goal. Motivational interviewing techniques will help
the individual focus on the goal or task to be achieved and motivate them to stay on
task, avoid distractors and achieve it.
For example, in order for Alex to achieve a successful relationship, effort needed
to be expended in planning how to explain to Joanne about having ADHD. The
alternative short cut, which did not require effort, was not tell her and to continue
the relationship on the basis of dishonesty. The latter course may have provided
immediate relief from the anxiety aroused in Alex whenever he contemplated

106 ADHD IN ADULTS
disclosure to Joanne, but the problem remained unresolved. Indeed, it may even
have become worse if, say, Joanne had observed Alex surreptitiously taking
tablets and then ended the relationship on the assumption that he was taking
illicit drugs. Alex examined his motivation to change the situation and achieve
a better relationship by discussing his readiness to engage in change by formulating his position in the ‘Stages of Change’ model (Prochaska & DiClemente,
1982). Alex identified that he had been oscillating between the precontemplation
and contemplation state. His ambivalence was expressed by him attempting to
find some ‘middle ground’ by arguing that he should wait to tell Joanne about his
ADHD (‘I’ll do it next week’). In Alex’s case, this was a delaying tactic, which
was challenged in the sessions. However, in some cases it may be sensible for clients to be encouraged to avoid premature disclosure in new relationships or less
close relationships (e.g. acquaintances, working associates). It is all about doing
what is right for the client and getting the balance right. This will inevitably
involve encouraging the client to plan ahead and think about the consequences
of their actions. As a therapist, the primary task is to help the client to learn to
think before they speak and act, or react impulsively on the spur of the moment.
Blurting out his medication history at a party is unlikely to be helpful in resolving Alex’s problem. Alex determined to progress onto a stage of preparation by
examining alternative solutions, rehearsal and role-play of favoured solutions in
preparation of the action stage.

Examining alternatives
After eliminating all the ridiculous and least likely options, the client will usually
be left with two or three possible ‘realistic’ solutions. These often have very different courses of action. This is the time to make a ‘pros and cons’ list for each – often
the advantages of one solution are the disadvantages of another. Weightings can be
given according to how important each ‘pro’ or ‘con’ is for the client. These may depend on the likelihood of achieving the goal, emotional well-being, time and effort.
Alex decided that he should choose between telling Joanne himself (‘sit down and
tell her sensibly’) and not telling her, but continuing the relationship. Alex’s pros and
cons for telling Joanne that he had ADHD are given in Table 6.3. A blank version
can be found on the Companion Website for use with clients.
Next Alex was asked to rank the five most important issues identified in the pros and
cons list. He chose:
1. It would help Joanne understand why I am the way I am (pro)
2. It’s being honest (pro)
3. It might freak her out (con)
4. She could find out anyway, and might be angry that I didn’t tell her (pro)
5. She may leave me (con)

PROBLEM SOLVING 107
Table 6.3

Example of a pros and cons list

Pros of telling

Cons of telling

It’s being honest
She may not mind
She could find out anyway, and might be
cross that I didn’t tell her
It would help her understand why I am the
way I am
The longer I leave it, the harder it will be
to tell her

It might freak her out
She may leave me
I don’t want to worry her
The relationship may not last
She may laugh at me and
tell other people

It then became clearer to Alex that, not only did he choose more pros than cons in
his importance list, but he also ranked them higher. Therefore, he decided to tell
Joanne that he had ADHD. The next stage for him was to work out exactly how best
to do this.

Rehearsal
Rehearsal is an effective way of preparing for a difficult conversation or situation.
The client should be taken into an imaginal mode by asking them to imagine the
anticipated situation and see themselves acting out the chosen solution. The client
can be oriented to the situation by being cued to imagine and describe the surroundings in detail, for example colour of curtains, type of flooring, cooking smells. At
first, some clients may have difficulty engaging in an imaginal mode, but with practice this will become easier. In such cases, it may be helpful for the therapist to
initially talk the client through the specific steps that may be taken to solve the
problem whilst the client is in the imaginal mode. However, it is important that the
client progresses to rehearsal of the solution unaided. In addition, they should try to
identify possible pitfalls to success that were not immediately obvious and determine
collaboratively how these may be overcome and/or constructively managed. The client should also consider how they feel during the process and at the outcome.
For example, Alex was asked to imagine the situation carefully. He thought it would
be better to tell Joanne at her house, when they were relaxing watching television.
However, when this was rehearsed in the imaginal mode, Alex discovered that the
TV distracted him. Alex then decided to tell Joanne in the kitchen over a cup of
coffee. Alex rehearsed what he would say to Joanne and, by using this technique, he
felt more confident in his ability to see the task through to fruition and to achieve the
outcome he desired.
Prior to working in imaginal mode it is very important to determine a calm, happy
imaginal state that the client relates to positively. Sometimes the client may become

108 ADHD IN ADULTS
distressed when working in imaginal mode and they may imagine alternative consequences, which may be negative. In such an event, the client should signal feelings
of distress to the therapist using a predetermined code (e.g. by lifting a finger in the
air) and the therapist then verbally directs the client to imagine a neutral, calm scene
and focus on breathing exercises (see Chapter 9 on Anxiety).

Perspective taking role-play
The next stage involved Alex role-playing the scenario with his therapist. A roleplay method is particularly useful for rehearsing problem solutions involving other
people such as giving notice at work and ending a relationship. In the case of
Alex, the role-play was reversed so that the therapist pretended to be Alex (the
client), and Alex role-played his girlfriend Joanne (the person receiving the information). This helped Alex think about the likely impact of his problem solution
on Joanne and amend his plans accordingly, such as by using more sensitive wording to explain about ADHD, having some written information to hand to her that
would help dispel any inaccurate stereotypical lay beliefs she may have. Alex was
able to think about the questions that Joanne might ask (for which he could then
prepare answers and rehearse either in imaginal mode or by further role-play in
sessions).
Practicing such situations in this way will make individuals feel less nervous when
the situation actually happens and they will feel more prepared. This will improve
their sense of self-efficacy and belief that problems are solvable and change is
possible.

Challenging cognitive distortions
It is likely that at some stage during treatment distorted thinking will handicap the
problem-solving process, particularly when maladaptive habitual responses are
favoured (‘I’m no good at it’, ‘I’ll fail’, ‘I’m stupid’, ‘They don’t like me’). The client
needs to learn how to check that their ideas about various solutions are productive
and viable. Cognitive distorted thinking is likely to sabotage helpful solutions in
favour of ones that add little to resolving the problem, and/or may make it worse (for
more help with cognitive distortions, see Chapter 11 on Low mood and Depression).
In such circumstances, potentially helpful solutions may be discarded erroneously
due to ‘faulty thinking’ processes resulting in:

• Overgeneralisation, e.g. ‘everything I do always goes wrong, so why bother trying’.
• Black-and-white thinking, e.g. ‘if I can’t get it 100% right, there’s no point in doing it at all’.
• Jumping to conclusions, e.g. ‘I only just managed to complete Part 1, so I’ll never
get Part 4 finished’.

PROBLEM SOLVING 109

Alex tended to jump to conclusions and overgeneralise. In fact, his first girlfriend
had ended their relationship before she went travelling around Europe with a friend.
This occurred just after he had disclosed to her about him having ADHD. It may
have been a matter of bad timing. Alex had formed the belief that future relationships would end if he told his friends and girlfriends about having ADHD. He felt
very anxious about it. However, Alex had never considered alternative possibilities,
such as his ex-girlfriend had wanted to go travelling for years, it had been arranged
for a long time and it had nothing to do with him disclosing to her that he had the
disorder. In fact, Alex had ignored evidence to the contrary, as his ex-girlfriend had
said that she wanted to stay friends. She had stayed in touch and had sent him post
cards from various countries. Additionally, Alex tended not to focus on the fact that
his friends had not responded in a similar way. He still met them regularly in the pub
and his best friend had obtained an information leaflet about adult ADHD.

Stage 4: Implementing the Chosen Solution
The client should have become motivated to effect change and resolve problems, and
they will have generated multiple solutions to their problem and chosen the best. The
client will have been prepared by rehearsal in sessions and have role-played potential
outcomes. The next stage is to plan and implement the solution. Once an appropriate
solution has been determined and rehearsed, the client is encouraged to implement
this, taking care to avoid procrastination and time-wasting traps. For example, say
the problem is debt and the target is to pay off £200 of a credit card bill by the end
of the year. The solution implemented is putting aside £5 each week. This illustrates
how steps to achieve the target should be planned by breaking down the goal into
smaller achievable steps.
However, the process is often more complex, especially when problem-solving difficulties involve interpersonal relationships. This involves thinking about the best
time and situation in which to address the problem, and if possible ‘set the scene’.
Depending on the problem, the time management principles set out in Chapter 6 may
also be helpful if ultimate resolution and goal achievement requires the individual
to create small achievable steps or tasks that lead to success. Tasks must be clearly
defined and goals realistic. In the case of Alex, he was encouraged to work out a
specific evening and place most suited to disclosing his ADHD status to his new
girlfriend. This was then reviewed in the following session.

Step 5: Evaluating Success
Following the implementation of a solution, the client should evaluate their success.
Did they achieve the desired result? Positive feedback by the therapist is a powerful
reward! It is important that the client feels proud of their achievement and focuses
on the benefits of success. They should reflect on the impact of success on their

110 ADHD IN ADULTS
self-confidence, their mood and also their understanding of the original presenting
problem (was it as life-threatening as they first thought?). Positive feedback will
increase the likelihood of the client engaging in a problem-solving process without
delay (or procrastination) in the future and motivate them to pursue further goals.
For example, Alex told his girlfriend and she was very pleased that he had trusted her
and told her. Joanne told Alex that she had diabetes and had to inject insulin every
day. She had been worried about how to tell him. In future, Alex adopted a similar
model of disclosure to friends at the appropriate time. Both Alex and Joanne felt
more confident about their relationship.
In case of partial or no success, the therapist must systematically evaluate all the
obstacles and difficulties that arose and recommence the problem-solving process
to explore how these may be better dealt with. Useful areas to explore include the
client’s feelings about successful resolution, such as fearing the consequences, anxiety about change or uncertainty. It may be that the problem needs to be re-evaluated
and resolved in a different way. For example, if Alex had been unable to raise the
issue of ADHD with Joanne, the therapist could examine where the obstacles lay.
Had there been an external distraction that prevented him (e.g. other people nearby)
or had Alex been thinking negatively about his solution plan?
Rewards are crucial to encourage the client and provide motivation. The reward system should include rewards for attempting resolution of the problem and one greater
reward for successful resolution of the problem. Alex and Joanne went out for dinner
to a romantic restaurant.

POSITIVE REAPPRAISAL
Despite the many pitfalls experienced by adults with ADHD in solving problems, they
have been shown to reappraise stressful situations in a positive way (Young, 2005).
This may mean that they are more resilient to disappointments and better able to
‘bounce back’ from difficulties. This trait has been found to be positively associated
with impulsivity. This may indicate that more impulsive individuals may be less
prone to dwell on their difficulties and attempt to get on with life. This can be hugely
advantageous and may underpin many ADHD individuals’ creative and entrepreneurial personality characteristics and successes.

CONCLUSIONS
People with ADHD are often faced with multiple problems that require solving.
Their difficulty is in coping with problems adaptively and finding appropriate
solutions. All too often, people with ADHD respond to the problems in their daily
lives in a disadvantageous way, for example putting off targets, avoiding situations

PROBLEM SOLVING 111

or people, responding in an irrational or impulsive manner. This is likely to be due
to cognitive deficits and maladaptive coping styles that can hinder their problemsolving abilities. When small problems mount up, these become great problems.
People with ADHD respond in much the same way to great problems or life events.
It is at this point that the psychological problems such as depression and anxiety may
develop when individuals feel overwhelmed by stressful problematic situations. It is
therefore important that the individual with ADHD learns to encounter and resolve
problems in a timely and appropriate way. It is important, however, to recognise that
individuals with ADHD often have a predisposition to reappraise stressful situations
in a positive light, which may be a protective factor for future problem solving and
strengthen their resilience.
This chapter has reviewed the main stages involved in solving problems. These
include identifying and defining problems, and generating alternative solutions. The
implementation of a solution must always be followed by analysis and evaluation
of success, and reward for success. This provides a constructive feedback loop to
inform earlier stages of the future problem-solving process.

7
