FRUSTRATION AND ANGER

Everyone gets angry sometimes, it is a natural emotion. Most people feel angry when
they perceive injustice or feel that their rights have been violated. However, due to
their symptoms, ADHD individuals may be predisposed to have a labile or explosive
temperament. They may have developed maladaptive ways of coping with feelings
of anger and express their feelings inappropriately. For people with ADHD, feelings
of anger are more likely to be expressed outwardly than inwardly suppressed, due
to their inability to inhibit a response and having a low threshold for irritability and
boredom. However, denial of anger and suppression of angry feelings is not uncommon, especially in compliant individuals. When anger is expressed overtly, other
people are likely to perceive this as a negative character trait, and view the person
with ADHD as being unpredictable and, in some cases, frightening and dangerous.
Tolerating frustration can be difficult for adults with ADHD and, in particular, they
may become annoyed by their lack of achievement and failure to finish tasks. They
also get annoyed when friends and family, meaning well, start telling them what to
do, organise their life for them, complain about lack of commitment and motivation.
This is perceived as ‘nagging’. A cycle of negativity is commonly reported between
parents (especially mothers) and children with ADHD (Barkley, 1998). Research
into ADHD in childhood has shown that negative interactions are a reciprocal process, with ADHD affecting the manner in which the child responds with their parents
and, hence, the way in which parents behave towards their children. These learned
cycles of responding may well extend to adult close friendships and intimate relationships. People with ADHD may feel resentment towards other people who do not
have ADHD and seem to have fewer difficulties and more successes in life. Thus,
anger management difficulties can lead to numerous negative outcomes, including
breakdown in relationships, termination of employment and involvement with the
police.
It is not uncommon for people with ADHD to have accumulated feelings of anger
towards psychiatric services. This is frequently expressed, following diagnosis
and treatment, as dissatisfaction towards services for not meeting their needs.

178 ADHD IN ADULTS
People with ADHD usually have a long history of presenting to both child and
adult psychiatric services (Young et al., 2003). They can feel that their problems
have not been taken seriously by clinicians and also may feel misunderstood by
partners and friends. Some individuals may have a propensity to blame others for
not identifying the disorder in the fi rst place and for not providing appropriate
support. They may feel frustrated and angry if they believe that they have been
previously misdiagnosed or labelled, or misjudged. It will not be easy for individuals with this type of experience to make a collaborative therapeutic alliance.
Clinicians need to be aware of these issues and may need to sensitively introduce
anger management techniques early in therapy, in order to develop rapport and
gain trust.
This chapter explains how, in order to understand their anger, people with ADHD
require education regarding its function as a normal emotion. Reasons for becoming
angry are reviewed for people with ADHD, such as the need for immediate gratification. Dysfunctional ways of managing anger common in ADHD are discussed,
including having too much control and having too little control. Treatment involves
psychoeducation regarding the stages of anger, according to a cognitive behavioural
model, focusing in particular on observing the physical signs of anger, such as body
language. Ways of dealing with insults and criticisms are addressed, including recognising the difference, appreciating constructive criticism and learning to accept
criticism. Similarly, developing assertive expression in the context of poor impulse
control and recognising the difference between aggressive behaviour and assertive
behaviour are covered.

WHAT IS ANGER?
Anger is a normal emotion experienced by everyone. The aim of treatment is, therefore, not to ‘stop’ anger, but to improve control and use anger adaptively. It can be
particularly functional in motivating change. Anger is a healthy emotion that allows
individuals to problem solve, to impose control and/or to change a situation. A second aspect of anger is that it has an alerting function. It signals potential danger and
protects us from harm. It is not uncommon for anger to be triggered in situations
where other emotions are activated, such as fear or sadness. Situations where there is
a perceived or actual injustice are likely to trigger anger and it represents an adaptive
response to dissatisfaction with the environment. Anger management is about identifying effective ways for the client to show their discontent without causing distress
to themselves or others.
There are obviously many reasons why people become angry. The following themes
seem to be shared by many people with ADHD:
1. Taking things personally. People with ADHD may be more likely to interpret any
threat or blame as a personal slight, and become angry as a result of these feelings.

FRUSTRATION AND ANGER 179

For example, if a family member has mislaid a belonging and asks whether other
family members have seen it or used it, it might be presumed that they are being
accused of something (borrowing it without asking, stealing the item). Because
the person feels they are being (unjustifiably) blamed for something, they feel
upset and angry.
2. Losing control of a situation. If someone with ADHD feels like they are not succeeding, they tend to give up easily. It is better to give up than plough on with a
task, struggle alone with it and feel hopeless and stupid. Their inability to achieve
may make them feel angry inside and giving up can compound frustration. It may
also make other people annoyed with them and lead to confrontation. Feeling
angry in such circumstances has a secondary function, as high emotional arousal
is distracting. The individual focuses on their feelings, enabling them to escape
or avoid the situation, such as the unfinished task.
3. Feeling threatened. Situations where an individual is being directly challenged
or threatened can be difficult to manage for anyone. However, individuals with
ADHD are more likely to catastrophise and overreact to criticism, even when this
is constructive, due to their own learned sense of underachievement. If they do
find themselves in a provocative situation when someone is bullying or intimidating them, they may act on impulse and respond aggressively without thinking
about the consequences of their behaviour.
4. Learned behaviour. People with ADHD may have developed maladaptive
response patterns over years for dealing with frustration and anger. It may be
that they are not particularly angry, but behave in a way that suggests they are,
because this is how they have learnt to behave. This will give the wrong impression of themselves to other people who perceive them as being ‘prickly’ and
overly sensitive.
5. Poor impulse control. This core symptom can itself lead to an escalation of feelings of anger, whereby an individual may be more likely to act out on their anger
either in an aggressive or violent way towards others, themselves or property.
Thus, individuals are less likely to walk away from a severe verbal confrontation
and more likely to respond with physical aggression. This may mean that they
enter into many fights or destroy property. Some people may harm themselves
impulsively and abuse substances.
6. Feeling resentful. Angry feelings may build up slowly, especially if the person
feels that they are being judged or stigmatised by others. They may feel resentful
of people who seem to have an easier life.
7. Frustration with attentional difficulties. It can be obvious when assessing
someone with ADHD when they become annoyed with themselves for not
being able to focus or sustain attention. They become angry when they make
mistakes, forget instructions, or are slow to finish. Adults with ADHD have
some insight into their difficulties, and they are often observed to give an
incorrect response and then later correct themselves realising their mistake.
However, anger can often compound attentional problems as individuals
can become distracted by their angry thoughts and lose focus on the task in
hand.

180 ADHD IN ADULTS
8. Frustration with lack of services. Adults with ADHD are likely to have experienced professionals who either dismiss the ADHD disorder as a clinically
valid condition and/or who lack knowledge and understanding about the disorder and their special needs. This occurs in educational services, social services
and health services. Often an individual has presented at multiple child and adult
services and told their story over and over and over again. This can be a hurdle
for a therapist to overcome and it may hinder progress.
9. Anger as an avoidance mechanism to processing other emotions. Feelings of
anger may be expressed in preference to the expression of other emotions, such
as distress and crying, in order to avoid the expression of what may be perceived
as ‘weaker’ emotions. This is more likely to occur in males with ADHD.
10. Stimuli for excitement. Moving into a state of high arousal provides a state of
high stimulus and, for some individuals, excitement. This may satisfy a desire to
seek ‘thrills’ or ‘sensation’ and relieve feelings of boredom and monotony. For
example, an aggressive argument with lots of drama, shouting, gesticulating,
slamming doors and banging may provide an individual with an adrenalin rush.
This acts as a positive reinforcement of the behaviour, with the adrenalin rush
as the ‘reward’, thus increasing the likelihood of them repeating the behaviour.
Anger can also be rewarding if the angry individual is able to avoid an uncomfortable or boring situation.
11. A source of communication. Many individuals have poor social skills and have
difficulty communicating and expressing their thoughts and feelings. This may
be due to a specific skills deficit and/or to a lack of confidence that has been
negatively reinforced by a history of dysfunctional social interactions with peers
and siblings. Individuals may respond with anger for two reasons, they may
misappraise social situations and the intentions of others and respond aggressively (social skills deficit) and/or feel resentment and anger towards people
with whom they interact in a world they perceive as harsh and biased against
them.
12. Establishment of superiority. People with ADHD commonly develop low selfesteem, and this is probably established early in childhood. It becomes reinforced as they become older and failures become a self-fulfilling prophecy. In
order to defend against feelings of vulnerability and cover them up, they may
use aggression to convey the message, ‘I’m better than you’. As the therapist
will demonstrate to the individual in treatment, simply engaging in this process
(even when feelings of anger are not actually present) will have an iatrogenic
effect, resulting in ‘real’ feelings of anger.
13. Road Rage. There are many opportunities on our roads for drivers to build up
feelings of anger: people driving too fast, too slow, cutting in, not indicating, not
giving way, abruptly stopping, people flashing their lights, tooting their horns
or making gestures. Driving on busy roads and at peak times is stressful at the
best of times and everyone knows what it is like to be in a driving situation when
they feel irritated and frustrated. However, there is an increased risk that people with ADHD will experience road rage and also have road traffic accidents
(Barkley 2002; Barkley, Guevremont, Anastropoulos, DePaul & Shelton, 1993).

FRUSTRATION AND ANGER 181

These occur because individuals drive without due care and attention; they may
become distracted from their driving by talking to passengers or by scenery;
they may drive recklessly. An alternative or additional possibility is that they
may become wound up in situations that are common to most people, but where
they are unable to self-regulate their feelings of anger and inhibit their responses.
People with ADHD are therefore more likely to act in a provocative way on the
roads, to jump out of their cars at traffic lights and threaten other drivers.

DYSFUNCTIONAL MANAGEMENT OF ANGER
There are two main ways in which people with ADHD may manage their anger
maladaptively. The first is through escalation of a situation by an overt expression of
aggression, and the second is by suppression of angry feelings.

Escalation
A person with a predisposition to ‘escalation’ is likely to explicitly express their
feelings of anger and to make them well known to the people around them. Their
threshold for revealing annoyance is much lower and they may be labile in temperament. Such individuals are likely to have many impulsive symptoms and their poor
behavioural control and emotional regulation difficulties result in them being more
likely to respond explosively in stressful and challenging situations. For example, if
someone pushes in front of them in a queue, or if someone makes a personal remark,
they are unlikely to inhibit the impulse to respond aggressively, by either making a
remark verbally or through non-verbal expression (e.g. glaring or standing too close
to the person). This can lead to either a subtle escalation of aggression or a rapid
escalation, depending on the severity of response, the manner in which their feelings
have been communicated and the response of the recipient. Some people feel a sense
of power and excitement by deliberately provoking and intimidating other people,
which has a reinforcing property by providing an immediate reward. It may also be
functional, as it means the individual avoids displaying other emotions, such as their
own fear and anxiety, and/or revealing feelings of vulnerability. There may also be
positive reinforcement from the recipient backing down. Although this will often be
a ‘normal’ way to respond to overt threat and provocation, the behaviour will be perceived as submissive and reinforce the fact that they can achieve this status through
intimidation. Of course, the longer-term impact of this type of behaviour includes
losing friendships, destroying objects, physical injury and criminal convictions.

Suppression
This second type of anger is latent or suppressed anger. When asked, individuals
often deny feeling angry and do not admit to situations that have made them feel
angry or upset. A person with a predisposition to suppress angry feelings expresses

182 ADHD IN ADULTS
these covertly. They may be passive-aggressive and compliant. They may appear to
be coping well with stressful situations but all the time feelings of resentment and
anger are slowly building up inside. In such cases, individuals may suddenly explode, the trigger being seemingly innocent. Their response will be commented on
by others as being disproportionate to the trigger. They may have a reputation for being unpredictable, a ‘loose cannon’. Another way in which suppressed anger may be
released is in circumstances when this has developed from experiences that remain
unresolved, in other words that were not dealt with at the time. Anger that has been
‘bottled up’ may surface in seemingly unrelated situations, which remind the individual of the earlier experience and their feelings about it. It is thus misplaced anger
and can cause great confusion to those around. In order to avoid the inappropriate
expression of this type of anger, the client needs to develop an understanding about
difficult situations they have experienced in their lives, relate these to their feelings
and learn to express these appropriately and move on.

TREATMENT OF ANGER
When treating individuals with anger problems, the therapist needs to begin with
psychoeducation. This is achieved within a CBT framework of teaching the individual to recognise feelings of anger, physiological responses, thoughts and behaviours. They are then encouraged to determine the stages of anger, the antecedents,
behaviours and consequences of anger. Specific anger management techniques are
then introduced, such as distraction techniques, self-talk and relaxation methods.

Psychoeducation
Recognition of Anger: As with other emotions, anger can be conceptualised as having three components that are interrelated: physical, cognitive and behavioural (see
Figure 10.1 – also presented on the Companion Website in handout format). Clients
should think about the last time they were angry. What parts of the body do they notice
change when they are angry? Such changes are caused by increased adrenaline as the
body is preparing to face a threat. After the physical symptoms, negative or aggressive
thoughts occur automatically and can serve to increase the physical anger symptoms.
Negative thoughts may be ‘I hate this man’, ‘I’m going to kill him’. Negative thoughts
can lead to angry behaviour, such as clenching fists, squaring up, invading personal
space, which may similarly go unnoticed by the individual. Videoing role-plays may
be a useful method to identify those behaviours that need to be the focus of intervention. However, negative thoughts occur so rapidly when anger takes hold, so it may
mean that only identification of feelings or initial ‘gut reactions’ are possible. It is
important to encourage the client, in such circumstances, to stop and not respond automatically. Simply encouraging the individual to stop and take stock; that is, to pause
before acting, may be sufficient to prevent an escalation of anger into violence.

FRUSTRATION AND ANGER 183
PHYSICAL
• Increased heart rate
• Tension
• Sweating
• Increase in pitch and volume of voice

COGNITIVE
• I’m getting mad
• I’m furious
• I’ll kill him!
• How dare she!

BEHAVIOUR
• Finger pointing
• Staring
• Standing up and close
• Storming off

Figure 10.1 Physical, cognitive and behavioural aspects of anger

Body Language
Clients should be encouraged to pay particular attention to body language as it is
an important and primary indicator of anger. They should be asked to identify the
physical signs of anger, both their own non-verbal signs and those of other people.
If individuals are more aware of their own anger signs, they are also more likely to
be able to identify them in others. Early identification of a situation getting out of
control means that the individual has a longer period to think rationally before high
levels of arousal cause them to react. It also provides the opportunity to introduce
techniques to de-escalate the situation and walk away.

Three Stages of Anger Expression
Anger can be understood as a three-stage ‘ABC’ process, involving antecedents to
anger, behaviour during anger (anger expression) and consequences of anger. It is
therefore useful to establish a personal pattern or ‘blueprint’ for the expression of
inappropriate anger. For some people, rather than beginning with an examination
of the client’s own anger behaviour, it may be useful and less threatening for them
to think about someone else whose anger they have recently observed, even a confrontation on television. Following this example, they may then feel more comfortable talking about the stages of their own anger.

184 ADHD IN ADULTS
1. Antecedents
There are often common triggers of anger, for example, being with certain people
in certain places (e.g. family celebrations, job appraisals). Clients should be encouraged to look for commonalities in situations when they become angry. They may
then develop strategies for either avoiding such situations or preparing themselves
so that they can handle the situation more appropriately. This can include preparing
self-statements to keep themselves calm, practising in advance what they could say,
and also to determine which compromises they may be willing to make to diffuse
the situation.
For example, Jonathan, who was an IT programmer, found that he was more likely
to become angry when he was concentrating and people interrupted him at work.
He had a tendency to be verbally aggressive to people who disturbed him. He often
regretted being rude to colleagues immediately afterwards and spent the rest of the
day worrying about what they thought of him and not managing to get his work
done. Using problem-solving techniques, Jonathan developed a system to convey to
colleagues that he could not be disturbed between certain times and was willing to
act as a help-desk at certain times of day.
2. Behaviour
The client should learn to recognise their physical signs of anger and develop ways
of behaving and thinking that allow them to display their anger appropriately, so that
they do not lose control. Techniques are discussed in the anger management section
to address these issues.
For example, Jonathan learned that an early indicator for him feeling angry was him
becoming impatient with the approaches and requests of others. Usually he was very
helpful and would take great care to explain a concept. He also noticed that his face
started to feel hot and in his mind he started to swear at the people asking for help.
By identifying these indicators, Jonathan was able to recognise his own signature
early warning signs of anger and avoid losing control and upsetting colleagues.
3. Consequences
The client should be asked to reflect on how they behaved and coped with that situation. They can examine both the positive and negative consequences. For example,
Maria often became angry in traffic jams and, instead of waiting, she responded by
driving down side-roads even though she often did not know where they led. This
relieved her feelings of tension but she often ended up lost and took longer to arrive at her destination. Having recorded the time it took her to make both journeys
(taking alternative options) over a two-week period, Maria discovered that she actually saved more time, and arrived at her destination earlier by sticking to the main

FRUSTRATION AND ANGER 185

route (despite the traffic jams) than driving around back roads to avoid the queues.
Sessions focused on establishing methods to support Maria in sticking to the main
route, by making the back routes less attractive and finding a way to fill the time
whilst she was in the traffic jam (see techniques below).

ANGER MANAGEMENT
It is not easy to learn to manage feelings of anger, especially when individuals are
predisposed to impulsive responding, which may mean they make angry outbursts
and cannot inhibit themselves from lashing out. It is one thing to practise anger
management techniques within sessions and quite another to apply them when the
individual feels upset and aroused. Together with a labile temperament, this can
mean that individuals have considerable difficulty with anger control.
It is important to move away from the perception that it is the person that is the problem. It is a problem that the person has. Just as an individual can make themselves
feel angry inside by thinking about situations and people who have caused them to
become upset in the past, it is possible for them to make themselves feel less angry.
It is a matter of anger control and the client needs to feel empowered. It may be helpful to actually demonstrate this process in sessions by asking the client to ‘re-live’
and describe an anger-provoking scenario in an imaginal mode. When they start to
feel angry, the client should be reminded that they have induced themselves to feel
this way and that their physical and cognitive state has undergone some fundamental
changes. The therapist should point out changes in the body, ask the client to write
down what is happening to them (sweating palms, palpitating heart, face feeling
hot). The client should also be asked to look in a mirror and describe what they see
(red face, furrowed brow).
If the client cannot re-live a previous anger-provoking experience or can do so
without inducing physical symptoms of anger, then it may be helpful to role-play a
scenario that is meaningful and relevant to the client. For example, Mick was getting
very upset with his housemate, Dave, who kept ‘borrowing’ his CD player to take
to work each day. Dave was a car mechanic and his CD player at work had broken.
On three occasions Dave had brought the CD player back with flat batteries. Mick
had put in new batteries but Dave had made no comment. Mick liked to play his
CD player when he had a bath in the evening as he found it helped him to relax and
unwind. Mick was getting fed up with Dave’s lack of consideration and he was feeling taken for granted. In the treatment session, the therapist role-played Dave and
Mick role-played himself becoming extremely angry with Dave and said that he was
inconsiderate and taking advantage of him. The therapist escalated the situation by
shouting at Mick saying he was being petty and childish. The therapist used negative
body language, by moving closer to Mick and pointing a finger at him. The therapist
then called ‘stop’ and de-escalated the situation, reminding Mick that this was a
role-play and they were in the treatment room. Mick was asked to say how he felt, to

186 ADHD IN ADULTS
think about his own physiological arousal, look in the mirror and describe what he
saw. He was asked to describe his thoughts, what was going on in his mind whilst the
therapist had shouted back at him. He was asked to think about what he might have
done next. Fight or flee? Mick was then taken through a relaxation technique that
included him imagining a calming, positive image (see Chapter 9).
By engaging in the above process, clients can learn to recognise how they behave
when they feel angry and how others perceive their body language. The role-play or
‘re-living experience’ can be gone through frame by frame, like watching a video,
and together the client and therapist can discuss the escalating and de-escalating
factors. For example, how did the client feel when the therapist pointed their finger
at them or stood closer to them? Did they notice facial and/or body changes in the
therapist? Most important, however, is the lesson that if anger is induced deliberately
within a session, then this is under the control of the client and therefore they also
have the ability to control anger outside of the session.
Of course, the therapist needs to exercise their judgement before role-playing anger
provoking scenarios within sessions. In some cases it may be wise to agree with the
client that a third party is present who can help by participating in the role-play.
Once the client has learned to recognise their feelings of anger, and that they may
exercise control over them, the next stage is to teach the client strategies to help them
manage their feelings of anger. There are three basic techniques that may be useful,
distraction, self-talk and relaxation.

Distraction Techniques
Recognising that a situation is escalating and becoming confrontational usually
means that the individual has an option. The option is to decide to opt out of the
situation by walking away. If the individual notices early signs of feeling angry then
they can distract themselves by walking away from the situation and occupy themselves in a neutral, unrelated task. However, it does not help to walk away from the
situation and then wind themselves up by talking about it to lots of people. Seeking
social support and asking friends for a perspective is different from complaining to
lots of people and directing their anger at them.
For example, if Mick had got into an argument and felt like hitting Dave but instead
walked away, this would be a positive response. However, if he then went and
telephoned all his friends to rant and rave about Dave, he would have continued to
become increasingly more angry and distressed. He may have returned and acted
provocatively towards Dave and escalated the situation further. Furthermore, he may
have upset and irritated his friends. So when walking away, attention should be
diverted to a positive or neutral occupation and not one that will fuel the person’s
anger further or direct it at someone else. This is destructive so the therapist must

FRUSTRATION AND ANGER 187

encourage the individual to be constructive when they have extracted themselves
from an anger-provoking situation.
This is especially so in cases when the individual is unable to walk away from situations indefinitely, for example, in work situations. By distancing themselves from
the situation, the physiological response will decrease, and the person will be able
to think more rationally and calmly. The client can then figure out a constructive
response and return to the situation in a better frame of mind.

Self-talk
Calming self-talk is about developing the ability to speak positively to ourselves.
This is achieved by collaboratively devising phrases the client may say to themselves to help control feelings of anger. Some people call this ‘positive thinking’,
but it is not just about thinking, it is a deliberate cognitive rehearsal of positive
self-statements that encourage and reaffirm the individual’s ability to get through the
situation and exercise self-control. For each person, the statements will differ, but
they may include statements such as ‘I can get through this’, ‘I am not going to show
this person that I am feeling angry’, ‘I am better than this’. This can be practised
by re-living the angry experience or by role-playing it again and including calming
self-talk statements.
When working in an imaginal mode, the client should imagine a past situation that
made them feel angry and then imagine themselves talking to themselves and encouraging themselves to cope better with the situation and have a more positive
ending. Self-talk statements may be cued by the therapist, but these should be rehearsed several times until the client is able to apply the technique themselves. It
is very important that the client can imagine themselves coping constructively with
the situation, that they imagine controlling their feelings and determining a positive
outcome.

Relaxation
Relaxation techniques are described in detail in Chapter 9 on anxiety management.
However, these techniques are very helpful for coping with feelings of anger as well
as anxiety because the techniques make the individual focus on themselves. This
not only means that clients learn to regulate their breathing, but that they concentrate on their internal state and distance themselves from external concerns. This
has been practised for many years by cultures throughout the world in the form of
meditation. Of course, relaxation techniques are not very helpful in controlling a
reactive response to a provocative situation by a person with a labile temperament
in vivo. However, these techniques will help people control feelings of resentment
that are bubbling under the surface and are being suppressed. By applying the

188 ADHD IN ADULTS
breathing exercises, inducing a state of relaxation, alternating tension and relaxation in the muscles of the body and engaging in calming mental imagery, the client
can manage ‘generalised’ feelings of anger, such as the feelings of resentment and
dissatisfaction that are present most of the time, but of which they are unsure why
or where they come from. The client should be encouraged to practice relaxation
techniques regularly and make them part of their daily/weekly routine as appropriate. It may be helpful for the client to listen to music that they find particularly
calming.

Reframing the Situation
The client will begin to learn to recognise feelings of anger in themselves and
in others, to identify signs or triggers that indicate a confl ict or confrontation
is getting out of control, to impose self-control and manage feelings of arousal
and de-escalate the situation. A further way of managing confl ict and confrontation is to teach the client to reduce the likelihood that a difficult situation will
become threatening or anger-provoking. This involves cognitively reframing a
situation and controlling the situation by improving the client’s mode of communication. This means teaching the individual to apply the “ADHD Formula”
(see Table 10.1).
A ⫽ Address the situation
First the client should state the facts of the situation. This is a simple appraisal of the
problem stated briefly and neutrally.
Mick: ‘Dave, this evening when you returned my CD player the batteries were
flat.’
D ⫽ Describe your feelings
Then the client describes how they are feeling. Again this should be factual and the
client must only use ‘I feel…’ statements rather than ‘You made me feel…’ statements, which can antagonise and attribute blame.

Table 10.1 The ADHD formula

Address the situation
Describe your feelings
Help them understand
Define the consequence

FRUSTRATION AND ANGER 189

Mick: ‘I feel really annoyed about this.’
H ⫽ Help them understand
The third stage is for the client to help the (target) person understand how they can
make the situation better. Again this is explicitly stated by providing a statement of
the desired resolution or outcome. This is a very important stage, which is often left
out of a process of resolution. It is very important to let the target person know what
it is that is wanted, they are not ‘mind readers’.
Mick: ‘In future I’d appreciate it if you would replace the batteries if they are
flat.’
D ⫽ Define the consequence
Finally, the client defines the consequence if the specified behaviour is not met.
Again this must be pragmatic and explicit.
Mick: ‘If you can’t agree to this, then in future I won’t lend you my CD player.’
By adopting the ADHD Formula, Dave learned how Mick was feeling, why he was
feeling that way, how he could put it right and what would happen if he did not
agree. It was simply but explicitly explained. Dave had been very busy at work. He
had been very distracted and he had meant to replace the batteries but had forgotten.
Dave realised that he had not thought about the situation from Mick’s perspective
or realised that his behaviour had caused ill-feeling. The position was clear and the
situation was defused immediately by Dave apologising and replacing the batteries.
Mick had the outcome he wanted, he did not get worked up inside with building
feelings of resentment and thoughts that he was being taken advantage of by his
friend.

DEALING WITH INSULTS AND CRITICISMS
People with ADHD are particularly susceptible to anger following both insults and
criticisms. This is possibly because they are more likely to be defensive due to having received an accumulation of critical comments and feedback throughout their
lives from parents, teachers, friends and siblings, and now wish to protect their selfesteem. They are also more likely to respond impulsively to criticism, without hearing the person out or fully understanding what has been said, without accurately appraising the intention of the other person and assuming malicious intent. However, if
clients are able to learn to distinguish between insults and criticisms, they are more
likely to be able to respond appropriately to both types of statements.

190 ADHD IN ADULTS

Insults
An insult is something that is said to cause annoyance whereas a criticism is something that is said about a behaviour. Insults are inherently designed to make a person
feel bad and/or angry. In order to prepare themselves to deal with insults, a client
should be asked to think of the worst insult someone has said to them that has made
them feel angry. They should then be asked the following questions:

• Why did this make you feel bad? (e.g. was it threatening to your family, masculinity, etc.)
• What was it about the statement that made you upset? (e.g. was it just what was
•

said or did the way it was said cause you to be upset also? Was it the tone of their
voice? Was it the demeanour of the person? Was it a specific body language?)
Why do you think the person said these things?

By taking a step back and being able to review an insult as a comment that was
intended to cause upset, the client may be able to learn why it made them angry.
However, more importantly, they will be able to speculate on the motivation behind
the comment. This will help them to relocate the anger by understanding that this
is an emotion within the other person that is being expressed inappropriately and
unkindly towards others. This should help clients to see insults for what they are
and reject them as a truth about themselves. If a client feels they are being insulted,
self-talk in the form of calming statements will help them control their feelings and
control the impulse to retort aggressively, for example:

• ‘I know he is only saying this to wind me up, I won’t give him the pleasure.’
• ‘What do they know about my family anyway.’
• ‘I know that I am a decent person and that is what matters.’
Criticisms
Criticism is a necessary, and often helpful, form of feedback. It is much better if
it is presented constructively. However, it can be difficult for anyone to receive,
particularly if it is framed negatively. An example of the difference between positive
or constructive criticism and negative criticism is given below:

• Negative:
• Constructive:

This report is really difficult to read. It is so badly structured
that it is difficult to follow what you are trying to say. You need
to learn how to structure reports or you will never get a point
across.
You have written a good report and made lots of interesting points.
It could be made better if you structure it more by using sub-headings. Here is an example of a really good report, which may be
helpful for you to look at.

FRUSTRATION AND ANGER 191

Due to their history of failure and/or underachieving their potential, people with
ADHD are used to being criticised and, unfortunately, insulted. This means that
they find it hard to acknowledge any feedback that is not positive and rewarding
because they are hypersensitive to perceived criticism, even when this is sensitively
and constructively delivered. As soon as they perceive any form of critical feedback,
they feel threatened and become irritated and/or angry. This means they are likely
to disregard what is being said or interpret the comment in an overgeneralised way
(usually without hearing it out or discussing the comment fully and appropriately).
They may respond to the perceived criticism in one of two ways, both of which
involve an overreaction; (1) by becoming angry and aggressive; or (2) by feeling
excessively hurt and wounded. In the latter case, they may internalise the comment
as a unchangeable personality flaw, rather than perceiving the criticism as relating to
a behaviour that is changeable.
In order to deal with criticism, individuals with ADHD need to listen carefully to
what is said to them and make sure they fully understand the problem. Attentional
deficits may lead them to miss the earlier part of a statement and just catch the end,
which means that their reaction will be based on missing information, an inaccurate
appraisal and interpretation of what has been said. Constructive criticism usually
begins with a positive comment, and, if this has been missed, they are more likely to
interpret the comment or feedback as a personal insult. By now, the client should be
self-monitoring their feelings and be more able to recognise signs of increasing feelings of irritability and anger that may trigger an inappropriate response and/or one
they may regret. Thus, they will recognise ‘warning signs’ within themselves when
they receive feedback, comments and/or criticism that they perceive as negative and/
or threatening. At this point they need to be able to interrupt the anger process by
asking the person to explain the problem or comment in more detail. Through repetition of the comment they may hear parts that had been previously missed. They will
understand the issue better and establish the person’s motivation. It may, of course,
become clear that the person was being insulting, but equally it may become clear
that the person who is criticising the client is trying to help by offering good advice
and constructive feedback. Encourage the client to accept this gracefully even if they
are still slightly aroused and irritated. Role-play in sessions both giving constructive
criticism to others (avoiding rapid, blunt delivery of information) and receiving it. It
is important to role-play both aspects because the giving and receiving of constructive criticism is a mutual process, and understanding the dynamics of both sides will
help the individual to accept critical feedback better in future.
Giving constructive criticism means phrasing a criticism in a helpful way, through
emphasising positive aspects, offering suggestions for improvements and supporting
the individual to make changes or corrections. Receiving constructive criticism
appropriately means making a statement of acknowledgement of the problem,
clarifying any misunderstandings, outlining a shared understanding and plan for
resolving the issue. In some circumstances, it may be appropriate to apologise for
errors or mistakes.

192 ADHD IN ADULTS
Understand the problem
What is the person trying to say?
What is the person’s motivation?

Is there any truth in it?

If YES
1.

Acknowledge the difficulty

2.

Apologise if necessary

3.

Ask for suggestions about how to
improve

If NO
1.

Is it an insult? If so, use self-talk
statements

2.

Take time to explain your point of
view

3.

Do not throw the criticism back

Figure 10.2 Dealing with insults and criticisms

Figure 10.2 is a flow chart which summarises ways of dealing with insults and criticisms. This is presented on the Companion Website in handout format.

ASSERTIVENESS
It has already been suggested that some people with ADHD suppress their
anger. They can be compliant in demeanour and go along with the wishes and/or
suggestions of others that they would normally reject. This means that over time they
may build up strong feelings of resentment inside. For these individuals, it will be
helpful for them to learn to become more assertive and to express their own wishes
and needs rather than going along with an attitude or behaviour with which they
disagree and which will make them angry later.
It may seem odd that people who have anger problems may also have difficulty
asserting themselves, but the two are not incompatible. Since they have low
self-esteem, some people are more likely to accept a situation than complain or try
and make changes. Their anger builds up inside because (1) they feel angry with
themselves for not standing up for themselves; and (2) because they feel angry with
other people whom they perceive as taking advantage of them. These feelings slowly
increase until, for some individuals, they explode unpredictably.

FRUSTRATION AND ANGER 193

Being assertive is different from being aggressive or passive. People who are
aggressive tend to be overly forceful when communicating with others, whilst people who are passive tend to be submissive. Their underlying needs are not met, thus
leaving them with feelings of resentment and/or anger. To be assertive is to be able
to express how you feel in a direct and honest manner without hurting or putting
down others (as in aggression) or feeling hurt or put down yourself (as in passive
behaviour).
Table 10.2 provides a list of assertive attributes completed by a man who had difficulty telling people what he really wanted or felt. The table can be reviewed with
the client in order to help them identify particular strengths and weaknesses. The
chart can be used pre-treatment, during treatment, and post-treatment to measure
progress and outcome. (This is presented on the Companion Website in Table 10.2a
for the self-report version and in Table 10.2b, which provides an informant report
version.)

Table 10.2

Measure of assertion

How well can you …
1. Stand up for yourself
if you feel someone is
taking advantage of you

Never

Rarely

Sometimes



2. Make alternative
suggestions to the ideas
of others



3. Say ‘No’ to other people



4. Tell someone you
disagree with them
5. Resist being pressured
to going along with
something you don’t
want to




6. Request an explanation
if someone is not being
clear



7. Express your feelings of
dissatisfaction
8. Tell someone they have
made a mistake
9. Face up to difficult or
challenging situations

Mostly





Always

Don’t
know

194 ADHD IN ADULTS
Treatment sessions should initially be psychoeducational and enable the individual
to understand the difference between assertiveness and aggression. Assertiveness
involves standing up for oneself, whilst being calm and courteous at the same time.
It requires acting in one’s best interests but without inducing anger or aggression
in others. Both assertiveness and aggression can involve feeling angry, but being
assertive requires the ability to express anger or distress without hurting or angering
others. For example, someone who is being assertive may communicate their anger
but without threatening the other person, or insulting them, or being punishing and
sarcastic. The way to convey this to the client is to encourage them to think about the
outcome they wish to achieve. What do they really want out of the interaction? Then
show them the way to get it using the steps outlined earlier in the ADHD formula;
that is, tell the person how they feel, tell the person what they want, tell the person
the outcome. Express this calmly and state it factually and explicitly. Then ask the
client to determine the outcome of not asserting themselves. This means they are
unlikely to get what they really want and achieve the desired outcome.
The manner of expression is important. Clients should be encouraged to express
themselves using the first person, because ‘I’ messages are assertive and communicate feelings, for example, ‘I feel very angry at the moment’. In contrast, ‘You’
messages are more likely to be perceived as aggressive and punishing, for example,
‘You make me feel very angry’.
The tone and manner of expression can be role-played in sessions. The therapist
should also look out for opportunities during treatment to acknowledge and positively reinforce assertive behaviour. In such situations and in role-plays, attention
should be drawn to functional characteristics of speech and body language that impress assertion as opposed to aggression. These include:
1. Take a step back – do not stand too close as invading another person’s personal
space could be perceived as threatening and induce a ‘fight-or-flight’ response.
This is likely to escalate a situation and maximise the possibility that it will have
a negative outcome, as the recipient is likely to respond in an angry way, which in
turn will increase the client’s anger.
2. Maintain eye contact and a firm facial expression – this allows the other person to
see that the client is serious about what they are saying. Help the client to practise
facial expressions and avoid ‘menacing looks’ by getting them to practise in a
mirror. Get them to do this in sessions and at home.
3. Maintain voice volume and pace at a steady level – no shouting or whispering.
Raising the volume and increasing the speed of speech may feel threatening to
the other person, thus increasing the likelihood that they will become angry and
the situation may escalate. If the other person is already angry, using a normal
volume of voice may also assist them in calming down. In contrast, speaking very
quietly or not at all may irritate the other person by appearing ‘passive-aggressive’
and/or denying the individual the opportunity to be heard and understood.
4. Use the ADHD formula outlined above.

FRUSTRATION AND ANGER 195

CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has highlighted the nature of anger and its adaptive functions. It has
identified how people with ADHD may respond to anger and sensitive areas for
them. Anger management skills crucially require the ability to identify anger signals within a CBT framework and raising awareness of antecedents, behaviours and
consequences of anger. The chapter also discusses the difference between insults
and criticisms and presents techniques for coping with each. Finally, the issue of
assertiveness, as distinct from aggression, is explored with strategies for increasing assertive behaviour. It is important for the therapist to be aware of previous
anger-inducing experiences with services that may block the development of a therapeutic alliance. Furthermore, it is also necessary for the therapist to ensure their own
safety when addressing topics which may arouse anger in their client.

11
