SLEEP PROBLEMS

Many people with ADHD report difficulties with their sleep but the nature of the relationship between ADHD and sleep disorders is unclear. Sleep disorders themselves
can cause underfunctioning of the prefrontal cortex and lead to symptoms such as
short attention span and impulsivity in people without ADHD. It is therefore likely
that sleep problems can exacerbate existing ADHD cognitive deficits. Sleep difficulties may arise from a comorbid disorder that coincides with ADHD, such as depression, anxiety or substance misuse. It is also possible that some sleep problems are
experienced as a symptom of the ADHD syndrome, as ADHD is characterised by
poor regulation of the arousal system, leading to attentional difficulties and overactivity. Thus, some individuals report feeling too restless to fall asleep, as though they
are constantly ‘on the go’ and cannot relax. These sleep problems may be related to
disturbances of the arousal system, so the neurobiological basis of ADHD is also
responsible for producing disturbances in sleep.
There is evidence to suggest that there is a specific relationship between attentional
problems and sleep disorders due to the close linkage between brain systems involved in regulation of the domains of sleep/arousal and those involved in the regulation of attention and affect (Owens, 2005). Sleep (during the night) and attention/
alertness (during the day) can be conceptualised as being opposite extremes of the
same continuum. Disturbance in attention and alertness in the daytime may impact
on sleep at night, and vice versa. It may be that a problem with regulating the arousal
system renders individuals with ADHD unable to achieve both full alertness and
deep sleep, and only allows them to function in grades of semi-alertness throughout
the day and night.
Restlessness is one of the core symptoms of ADHD and this may prevent individuals from relaxing and/or achieving adequate sleep. Children with ADHD have
been shown to exhibit higher levels of nocturnal activity (as measured by upper
and lower limb movements at night) than healthy controls (Konofal, Lecendreux,
Bouvard & Mouren-Simeoni, 2001). However, this activity has not been shown to

214 ADHD IN ADULTS
affect sleep continuity in a significant way, in other words, it did not cause them
to wake up. Nevertheless, adult clients have commonly reported experiencing difficulties with ceaseless mental activity and this problem may well persist into the
night and prevent them from sleeping. This can have a knock-on effect on their
ability to attend in the day when they may be more prone to ‘day-dream’ due to
sleep deprivation. In addition, ADHD individuals’ difficulties with organisation
and prioritisation can often leave them trying to complete tasks very late at night,
which encroaches on their sleep time. When they do go to bed, they may be preoccupied with their unfinished tasks. A further explanation may relate to sleep
problems being a side effect of the medication that is being used to treat ADHD
symptoms, as this is often a cerebral stimulant, which may cause the individual to
have difficulty falling asleep.
This chapter will describe the sleep disorders that are commonly experienced by
people with ADHD, including insomnia, sleep apnoea, nightmares, narcolepsy and
restless legs. In order to treat sleep problems, it is necessary to provide clients with
psychoeducational information regarding the process and function of sleep, and the
ways in which this can be disrupted. Strategies for monitoring and managing sleep
problems are outlined in the chapter. The relationship between mood and sleep is
also considered, as affective disturbances may be maintaining difficulties getting to
sleep and staying asleep.

SLEEP DISORDERS
There is evidence from studies of ADHD in children that they are more likely to
suffer from insomnia, snoring, restless legs and daytime sleepiness than children
without ADHD (Owens, 2005). It is not yet clear to what extent these problems
persist into adulthood as very little research has been conducted. This section will
describe how sleep difficulties may affect adults with ADHD and the characteristics
of each of the following disorders: insomnia, apnoea, nightmares, narcolepsy, and
restless legs syndrome.

Insomnia
Clients with ADHD usually report sleep problems that fall in to one or more of three
categories (Brown & McMullen, 2001):
1. Difficulty getting to sleep – not being able to fall asleep and lying awake for
several hours.
2. Not being able to wake up in the morning – finding it impossible to gain enough
momentum to get themselves out of bed.
3. Difficulty remaining alert during the day – feeling sleepy, particularly when there
is little stimulation.

SLEEP PROBLEMS 215

Difficulty falling
asleep

Overactivity in
evening

Becoming more awake
through day

Difficulty waking

Difficulty maintaining
alertness

Figure 12.1 Dysfunctional sleep cycle

Many individuals with ADHD experience all three sleep problems (getting to sleep,
waking up, maintaining alertness) because these are interrelated. They have difficulty in getting to sleep because they are wide awake in the evenings and tend
to do stimulating activities, such as working or socialising intensively. They may
find it difficult getting to sleep, eventually sleep fitfully, then find it hard to wake
up in the morning as they are still tired. Since they have not had enough sleep
during the night, they feel drowsy and find it difficult to remain alert during the
day. However, as the day wears on they gradually feel more awake and are ready
to become more active. The achievements made in the evening when they believe
they are more alert seem to negatively reinforce this schedule. In time, this cycle
of negative reinforcement becomes a dysfunctional pattern, in other words, a sleep
disorder (see Figure 12.1, which is also provided on the Companion Website in
handout format).
People with ADHD often describe difficulties in falling asleep and staying asleep.
Their problems can include any one or more of the following: delay in falling asleep,
insufficient duration of sleep, frequent awakenings, early final awakening. However,
most clients who complain of insomnia will overestimate how long it takes them to
fall asleep and underestimate how long they have actually been asleep.
Some people with ADHD may find that they become more restless later in the day
and as a result find themselves becoming involved in activities in the evening that
are incompatible with sleep such as sport, playing computer games or surfing the
internet. Overactivity in the evenings for other people with ADHD can be related to
their finding it easier to concentrate in the evening, perhaps because it is quieter and
the opportunity for distraction is minimised, for example when their children have
gone to bed. Also some evening activity can become necessary for individuals with

216 ADHD IN ADULTS
ADHD as their tendency to procrastinate throughout the day means that they have to
make up time and complete tasks by working late at night. Others describe gradually feeling sluggish in the morning but become increasingly alert and energised as
the day progresses. For example, Jane, a mature student, felt that she only had the
motivation to get her assignments completed the day before a deadline and usually
ended up staying up extremely late to finish her work.
Problems waking up in the morning are often related to not getting enough sleep
earlier in the night. Many individuals with ADHD describe finding it extremely
difficult to settle to sleep until well past midnight, even when they need to get up
early for work or college. This problem, therefore, may be a delayed reaction to
a late onset of sleep. Some ‘night owls’ can adapt their schedule to their sleepwake cycle and may be in a position to organise themselves so their day begins
later than most if necessary. This will work particularly well for self-employed
individuals, although this could feed into a lack of structure and cause more time
management difficulties through the day. Those who cannot be so flexible find
themselves trying to function on insufficient sleep. They end up feeling ‘groggy’
and irritable, particularly in the morning. This can lead to an exacerbation of
ADHD-related cognitive deficits due to tiredness. Of course, lateness and fatigue
will negatively influence an individual’s progress in education and work. This
sleep problem can also cause problems for families if morning responsibilities
are not being shared appropriately, for example partners of clients have reported
feeling very resentful if they are left to get the children up and ready for school,
whilst the ADHD partner continues to sleep through the morning. For example,
James was a self-employed carpet-layer and he had always had a problem with
getting up in the morning. As a consequence, he often only scheduled his fi rst appointment of the day at 12.00 noon, and in order to get jobs finished, would have
to work until 8.00 pm or beyond. This meant that he spent very little time with his
young children as they were usually in bed when he arrived home and he was in
bed when they were getting ready in the morning. The majority of the childcare
was left to his partner.
Most people with ADHD have difficulty with sustaining attention. However, some
people with ADHD also have difficulty in maintaining a sufficient level of arousal
or alertness when they are not performing stimulating mental tasks or physical activity. They may feel drowsy and find themselves yawning persistently. They may
fall asleep in lectures or meetings, in some cases despite having an adequate night’s
sleep. Again, this can have a huge impact on their education, career and social relationships. For example, Simon was made redundant when his firm went bankrupt.
He quickly ran out of money and was extremely worried about being able to last
until his next social security cheque. He often lay awake at night thinking about what
might happen to him in the future. As a result, he was unable to sleep and during
the day found himself feeling sleepy and yawning all the time. He managed to get
several interviews, but was never offered the posts because he was told he seemed
disinterested and lethargic.

SLEEP PROBLEMS 217

Sleep Apnoea
Sleep apnoea is a disorder of interrupted breathing during sleep. A common form is
obstructive sleep apnoea where the windpipe collapses during breathing when the
muscles relax during sleep. The brain responds by awakening the person to open the
windpipe, usually resulting in a snort or gasp. This can happen hundreds of times a
night. Sleep apnoea is associated with obesity or loss of muscle tone and can result
in loud snoring. It is often associated with excessive daytime sleepiness, fatigue and
altered attention, particularly vigilance (Mazza, Pepin, Naegele, Plante, Deschaux
& Levy, 2005).
In a study of children with sleep disorders and/or ADHD, Chervin, Dillon, Bassetti,
Ganoczy and Pituch (1997) found that habitual snoring was more common among
children with ADHD and that in general snoring was associated with higher levels
of inattention and hyperactivity. They suggest that sleep-related breathing disorders
could be a cause of ADHD symptoms and that these difficulties would improve
if their sleep disorder was treated. Improvements in ADHD symptoms have been
reported for three adults with ADHD who had their sleep apnoea treated (Naseem,
Chaudhary & Collop, 2001).

Nightmares/Night Terrors
Night terrors are extreme and animated versions of nightmares. The sleeper experiences a sense of terrible danger and may physically and vocally appear distressed
and try to defend themselves. Terrors can differ from nightmares in that they are less
likely to be remembered. This can be particularly frightening for the individual as
they may wake in the night with palpitations and other symptoms similar to a panic
attack, and yet not recognise the triggers. This may lead to a catastrophic interpretation in terms of their health, for example, that they are having a heart attack. For
children, it has been noted that some medications, particularly dexamphetaminebased preparations, can increase the frequency of nightmares (Efron, Jarman &
Barker, 1997). For adult clients, nightmares seem to be more likely in the context of
daytime anxieties where distress or preoccupations can adversely affect their sleep
and content of their dreams.

Narcolepsy
People with narcolepsy fall asleep at various times of the day, even if they have
had a normal amount of night-time sleep. Narcoleptics skip the first four stages of
sleep and plunge straight into REM sleep (REM sleep is explained in the following
section on psychoeducation). These attacks last from several seconds to more than
20 minutes. People with narcolepsy may also experience cataplexy (loss of muscle
control during emotional situations), hallucinations and temporary paralysis when
they awaken.

218 ADHD IN ADULTS
Adults and children with ADHD have been shown to be significantly more sleepy
during the day. However, it is unclear to what extent individuals with ADHD suffer
from true narcolepsy or whether their attentional difficulties may lead them to daydream and drift into a sleep-like state.

Restless Legs Syndrome
Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS) is a disorder that causes unpleasant crawling, prickling or tingling sensations in the legs and feet and an urge to move them for relief.
RLS can lead to constant leg movement during the day and repeated awakening
during the night. In a study of adults with RLS, Wagner, Walters and Fisher (2004)
found that over a quarter exhibited ADHD symptoms. It is not clear whether discomfort from RLS leads to poor sleep quality, which thus affects concentration
and hyperactivity, or alternatively whether RLS and ADHD are part of a symptom
complex with dopaminergic deficiency being involved in both disorders.

PSYCHOEDUCATION
It is important for individuals to gain an understanding about the process and functions of sleep in order for them to identify where their sleep problems arise, and
consequently how to improve their sleep. The sleep cycle is a good starting point as
it allows the client to recognise that sleep is not just one steady state but goes through
phases, and actually that sometimes it is normal to wake through the night. Reviewing the functions of sleep with a client can be a useful exercise in order to identify
any misconceptions about what happens if they do not obtain sufficient sleep or their
sleep lacks quality. In addition, the causes of sleep problems should be explained to
a client as they may quickly recognise a pattern to their sleep difficulties and be able
to help generate suitable strategies for improving their sleep.

The Sleep Cycle
In order to improve sleep disorders, it can be useful for people with ADHD to understand the characteristics and cycles of normal sleep. It was once thought that sleep
was a passive process, in which the brain ‘shut down’ and nothing happened, but it
is now established that sleep is a highly active state. Sleep goes in cycles, moving
quickly into deep restorative sleep, then coming back up towards wakefulness, then
back down again. This cyclical pattern is thought to exist for evolutionary reasons,
as it can be dangerous, because of increased vulnerability, to ‘shut down’ completely.
The intermittent return to a state from which it is easy to wake therefore serves an
important function that enables the individual to enter a state of semi-vigilance from
which they may wake if they perceive danger.
There are two different states of sleep: non-REM sleep and REM sleep. REM stands
for rapid eye movement as the eyes move rapidly during this stage of sleep, but

SLEEP PROBLEMS 219
Table 12.1 Stages of sleep
Stage

Description

Stage 1

This stage is characterised by drowsiness and ‘half sleep’, with a pattern
of moderately alert but relaxed brain waves. This is when drifting in and
out of sleep occurs for about 5–10 minutes but it is possible to be woken up
easily
Brain waves slow down from about eight per second to five per second
and eye movements stop. The heart rate slows down and body temperature
drops
Extremely slow delta waves begin to appear, interspersed with some small
quicker waves
During this stage the brain produces delta waves almost exclusively. It is
very difficult to wake someone during stages 3 and 4, which together are
called deep sleep. There is no eye movement or muscle activity
REM sleep is associated with shorter brain waves. This occurs after the
sleeper has moved back through a reversal of stages 4 to 3, to 2, to 1. In
REM sleep, breathing, pulse rate and eye muscles fluctuate erratically
and the muscles of the body, apart from those involved in breathing and
circulation, become paralysed

Stage 2

Stage 3
Stage 4

REM

not during non-REM sleep. During sleep, an individual passes down through four
phases of non REM-sleep then back through them in reverse order before entering
REM sleep (see Table 12.1). Each stage can be characterised by different patterns of
brain activity as measured by EEG recordings. Table 12.1 is also on the Companion
Website in handout format for use in sessions.
Non-REM sleep is associated with slower electrophysiological waves than during
waking; that is, the electrical activity of the brain becomes less pronounced. As the
muscles of the body become relaxed, the person enters a deep sleep from which it is
difficult to be roused. If someone is woken during this time, they may report fragmented and/or static visual images. It is during non-REM sleep that sleepwalking
and night terrors are most likely to occur.
After stage four, the sleeper goes back through stages three and two until they reach
stage one again. This phase is sometimes referred to as ‘stage one emergent’ but
more commonly called ‘REM’ sleep. When the sleeper switches to REM sleep from
non-REM sleep, their breathing becomes more rapid, irregular and shallow, their
eyes jerk rapidly in various directions and limb muscles become temporarily paralysed. Heart rate and blood pressure rise. REM sleep is also associated with shorter
electrophysiological waves. The respiratory system, pulse and eye muscles fluctuate
erratically. In addition, the muscles of the body, apart from those involved in breathing and circulation, become paralysed. A sleeper woken during REM sleep will have
an 80% chance of recalling a dream.

220 ADHD IN ADULTS
REM sleep

Figure 12.2 The sleep cycle

These sleep stages progress in a cycle down to deep sleep and back up to stage one
and into REM sleep, then the cycle starts over again going back into a deeper sleep
(see Figure 12.2, which is also presented in the Companion Website in handout format for use in sessions).
Adults typically go through four or five cycles of sleep, each taking about 90 minutes. Each cycle becomes gradually less deep, such that most of the deeper stage
four sleep occurs in the earlier half of the night. Almost 50% of total sleep time
is spent in Stage 2 sleep, about 20% in REM sleep and the remaining 30% in the
other stages. However, infants spend about half their sleep time in REM sleep and
typically sleep for 16 hours a day. Sleep requirements decrease through childhood
although adolescents still need over 9 hours per night. This is because considerable
growth occurs during this period. Most adults need approximately 7–8 hours of
sleep per night, although this varies from individual to individual. People who sleep
more or less than this amount may be at increased risk of illnesses, as sleep is unable
to carry out its usual functions, such as restoration of the immune system.

Functions of Sleep
Sleeping takes up such a significant proportion of our lives and yet it is still not clear
why it is so necessary. The functions of sleep can be surmised from what is affected
when someone has not had adequate sleep. Sleep deprivation has an effect on the

SLEEP PROBLEMS 221

nervous system, the immune system and cell growth and repair. Without sleep, neurons may become depleted in energy or over polluted with the by-products of normal
cellular activity. They need sleep to repair themselves in order to perform effectively
during the day. In addition, sleep may allow the brain to encode and store new information. Deep sleep coincides with the release of growth hormone in children
and young adults. There is also an increased production and reduced breakdown of
proteins during sleep. These are the body’s building blocks needed for cell growth
and repair. Sleep deprivation can impair judgement, reaction times (e.g. in a driving
simulator) and can magnify the effects of alcohol. In extreme cases, it can lead to
hallucinations and mood swings.
Sleep may have increased importance in ADHD because many individuals have
heightened activity levels during the day, and hence may require even more sleep
than non-ADHD people to fully recover their energy expended during the day.

Causes of Sleep Problems
Many different factors can influence sleep, including psychological, behavioural,
environmental or biological factors. Psychological factors include ADHD-related
symptoms, such as restlessness, as well as other mood disorders. Behavioural difficulties, particularly maladaptive sleeping patterns, can affect sleep during the night.
Although they are often very obvious, external triggers from the environment can be
causal in sleep difficulties because they wake the individual up. Biological factors
may be particularly relevant for people with ADHD as not only their medication can
influence their quality of sleep but also other lifestyle characteristics may play a role.
The different factors are explained in Table 12.2 (also provided on the Companion
Website in handout format).

TREATMENT OF SLEEP DISORDERS
Intervention with sleep disorders initially requires close monitoring of the problem
in order to obtain a baseline from which to measure change. This should include
consideration of the multiple factors that may affect sleep, such as activity levels,
diet, caffeine, alcohol, medication, etc. It is also important to explore fully the person’s expectations of sleep, for example by determining how much they believe they
need and what happens to them when they do not achieve this. Much of the literature
regarding insomnia suggests that people with sleep difficulties expect more sleep
than is necessary, for example, assuming that if they do not have eight hours of sleep,
then they will be unable to perform the next day. Sleep needs vary between individuals and also reduce with age. It may be that a 40-year-old client believes that they
should aim to sleep as much as they did when they were 18 years old. The therapist,
therefore, can educate the client about this issue and assist them in establishing their
optimal amount of sleep.

222 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 12.2

Factors which may affect sleep in adults with ADHD

Psychological/behavioural factors
Restlessness/Ceaseless mental activity
This core ADHD symptom may affect normal sleep patterns because the individual still
feels ‘on the go’ at bedtime and finds it very difficult to settle and relax
Worrying specifically about sleep
Worries about getting enough sleep or being tired in the morning if sleep is not achieved
may adversely affect the likelihood of falling asleep
Incompatible bedtime activities
For example, playing computer games whilst sitting in bed can make the individual more
alert and less likely to go to sleep easily. Working in the bedroom can also have a similar
effect, i.e. it distracts the individual from the function of the room, which is to sleep and rest
Chronic anxiety and/or depression
Ruminating about issues, such as the day’s events or low self-worth, may keep individuals
awake as they become more alert due to an increase in mental activity
Disturbance of activity-rest cycles
Irregular sleep patterns may arise from irregular bedtimes and waking times. For people
with ADHD, this may occur as a result of disorganisation causing them to leave tasks until
the last minute and stay up late to complete them. Other influences include changing from
night- to day-shifts or jet-lag
Oversleeping during the daytime
A common problem for individuals with ADHD is not getting up in the morning and
lying in bed until lunchtime or beyond. This has an effect on their ability to sleep at night.
Similarly, napping during the day may provide a short-term fix but does not facilitate a
good night’s sleep
Nocturnal panics
People with ADHD often procrastinate and leave things until the last minute. This can leave
them panicking late at night about the tasks they have not achieved for the deadline the
following day. They may then either choose to stay up all night working on the activity, or
decide to flout the deadline, which may then affect their sleep through worry or nightmares
Environmental factors
Unpredictable sensory stimulation (noise, light, etc.)
Given their distractibility, people with ADHD are more sensitive to external noises when
they are trying to get to sleep. For example, voices outside their window, noise from the
traffic, other people switching lights on and off outside their room or even when they have
fallen asleep with the television on
Significant signals
Due to their distractibility, ADHD individuals may be more sensitive to predictable
significant signals, such as daylight in the morning, or children waking. Children with
ADHD are more likely to have sleep disorders, which obviously affect their parents’ sleep
quality
Intense sensory stimulation
For example, high or low temperatures may unduly affect sleep, as can humidity, etc.

SLEEP PROBLEMS 223
Table 12.2

(continued)

Biological factors
Stimulant medication
For some adults with ADHD, cerebral stimulant medications such as methylphenidate
(Ritalin, Concerta) may improve ADHD symptoms and reverse restlessness. However, for
many individuals, stimulant medication may also keep them awake
Side effects of medication for health problems or psychiatric disorders
Other treatments, such as antidepressants, may affect sleep
Excessive caffeine intake
Some ADHD individuals choose to consume large amounts of caffeine during the day
either to self-medicate their ADHD symptoms, or to stay awake or more alert. Given that
caffeine has a long half-life (i.e. it remains in the system for several hours), intake of
caffeine in the late afternoon or early evening may disrupt sleep
Heavy meals shortly before bedtime
Digesting food is not conducive for sleep as the body is more active. Many people with ADHD
find that they forget to eat during the day, possibly due to their medication suppressing their
appetite, and then feel incredibly hungry in the evening and eat just before they go to bed
Vigorous physical exercise shortly before bedtime
Due to their hyperactivity, some people with ADHD find that at the end of the day they need
to ‘burn off’ excess energy, for example by going for a run or playing squash. Such physical
activity serves to wake the body up and may make it less possible for them to sleep adequately
immediately afterwards. Nevertheless, exercise earlier in the day is often beneficial for sleep
Physical health problems
Comorbid health problems, particularly pain, may prevent individuals with ADHD falling
asleep and maintaining sleep. For example, they may suffer from chronic toothache because
they have not organised their life sufficiently to go to the dentist for several weeks
Need for urination
Late night drinking may lead to an individual waking up with a need to urinate during the night
Respiratory difficulties
Problems such as obstructive sleep apnoea can lead to disturbed sleep and cognitive deficits,
which may masquerade as ADHD-like symptoms, or exacerbate pre-existing attentional
difficulties

Methods of managing sleep difficulties can be practically based by monitoring sleep
problems and changing behavioural patterns and/or include a more cognitive focus,
the latter technique being more effective if mood factors are influencing the quality
of sleep. Both of these approaches are described in the following sections.

Monitoring Sleep Difficulties
The first stage in treating sleep problems is to carefully monitor sleep in order to identify features that may be contributing to sleep difficulties. The sleep diary shown in Table 12.3 (and

Table 12.3 Sleep diary
How much
How were
Times you
What time you feeling
What was
alcohol
Time you woke up in
did you
the last
did you
before you What were you Time you went to
the night
take your
drink and thing you ate
went to
doing before you went to
sleep
and for
and when? medication?
when?
bed?
went to bed?
approx
bed
how long

Night
of
week

Did you sleep How much
caffeine did
during the
day? If so, for you drink
and when?
how long?

Mon

No sleep

Coffee at Whisky at P asta at
10.30 pm
1.15
1.00 am
before
bed

Tablet at
6 pm

Stressed Finishing
assignment

1.30 am

3.45 am

Tues

Nap at
2.00–
3.30 pm

Tea at
6.00 pm

Forgot

Agitated Out with
friends

1.00 am

Wed

No sleep

Coffee at None
11.00 pm

Toasted
Tablet at
sandwich
9 pm
10 pm

Worried
about
course

Trying to
read for
seminar
tomorrow

Tea at
4.30 pm

Shepherds
pie at
6.30 pm

Thurs No sleep

Fri

Nap at
3.00 in
lecture

Sat

Napping all None
afternoon

Sun

None

Bottle
Curry at
of
10.30 pm
wine,
brandy

None

Tablet at
4 pm

Coffee at 2 bottles Takeaway
Forgot
4 pm
of
pizza at
wine
1am
None

Coffee at Bottle
1am
of
wine

Time you
woke up
in the
morning

Total
hours of
sleep

Quality
of sleep
(0–10)

5.10–
5.55

8.15 am

4 1兾2

4

2.45 am

4.30,
5.10,
6.00

9.30 am

6 3兾4

3

11.45 pm 3.00 am

4.00,
4.30,
5.00,

6.30 am

3 1兾2

2

Tired

Watching soap 10.15 pm 10.30 pm None
operas

10.30 am

12

8

Drunk

Chatting to
friends

6.00

6.00 am

3

2

Watching DVD 11.00 pm 2.00 am

3.15–
4.30

10.00 am

6 3兾4

4

None

7.00 am

30 mins

0

3.00 am 3.05 am

Soup at
6 pm

Tablet at
5 pm

Low

Sandwich
at 1am

Tablet at
11 pm

Stressed Preparing
3.20 am
presentation
for Monday

6.30 am

SLEEP PROBLEMS 225

also on the Companion Website in a format for use in sessions) provides a strategy for
recording those features of sleep that are necessary to investigate prior to intervention.
Ironically, the process of monitoring may exacerbate sleep difficulties as they are the
subject of focus. Thus, the monitoring process must be applied over a period of several
days or weeks in order to obtain a reliable baseline. Table 12.3 shows the sleep diary
of Jane, a mature student at university. Jane had deadlines for course work and exams
pending. She was having problems organising her work. Some nights she worked late
into the night and she was feeling very anxious about passing her exams.
The sleep diary records information relating to 13 areas of interest as follows:1. Sleep during the day. Extra sleep during the day can affect sleep at night-time and
disrupt circadian rhythms. Therefore napping during the day should be avoided
wherever possible.
2. Caffeine intake. Caffeine stimulates the central nervous system, and leads to increased heart rate and alertness. Most people who consume caffeine experience
a temporary increase in energy and elevation in mood. Sensitivity to caffeine can
vary and depends to some extent on body mass (i.e. a smaller person would require
less caffeine to produce the same effect as a larger person). However, caffeine sensitivity is particularly affected by caffeine use, so people who drink caffeine regularly
develop reduced sensitivity to caffeine. Nevertheless, caffeine has a long half-life
and remains in someone’s system for up to 16 hours after consumption before being
passed through urine. Therefore, even drinking a cup of coffee in the afternoon can
affect sleep patterns later in the evening when the noticeable effects have worn off.
People who are experiencing sleep difficulties may increase their caffeine intake
during the day to keep them alert. This in turn has a delayed effect on their sleep.
3. Alcohol intake. Although alcohol can be used by some individuals as a ‘nightcap’
to help them go to sleep, this can actually perpetuate sleep difficulties. Alcohol
can induce drowsiness, but paradoxically prevents the individual from entering the
deeper more restorative stages of sleep. Thus, people who have been drinking alcohol and then slept all night may still complain of being tired in the morning as the
majority of their sleep may have been in sleep stages 1 and 2 where brain waves are
slowing down, rather than the more restorative stages 3 and 4 (see Table 12.1).
4. Food intake. Different types of food can affect sleep in various ways. Heavy
food, which is protein-rich or high in sugar, can lead to increases in overall levels
of alertness and can also activate the digestive system for longer. However, food
that is high in carbohydrates but low in protein and sugar (e.g. cereals, pasta),
can stimulate the release of neurotransmitters, which induce relaxation, such as
serotonin and melatonin.
5. Medication. Both prescribed and non-prescribed drugs can have side effects of
sleep difficulties. Cerebral stimulants are the mainstay treatment for ADHD and
they work on the reticular activation system, which is involved in arousal. Sometimes people with ADHD find that if they have taken their medication later in the
day, they have difficulty getting to sleep, possibly because the drug is still acting
on their level of arousal.

226 ADHD IN ADULTS
6. Affective state. Happiness, excitement, sadness, stress, anxiety can all play a
role in preventing sleep. The individual should try and record their feelings and
associated thoughts in order to identify what might be keeping them awake, such
as recurrent worries. This issue is dealt with later in this chapter.
7. Activity before bed. It is important for the body to be cued that it is time to slow
down and then sleep. Activities that counteract this process should be avoided,
such as exercise, mentally stimulating work or stress-inducing conversations.
People with ADHD are likely to be active throughout the day and the evening is
no exception. If they are busy performing last minute tasks right up until their
bedtime, this may affect their sleep. It is preferable to use activities to ‘wind
down’, such as listening to relaxing music, having a caffeine-free drink and
reading a magazine.
8. Time in bed. The basic boundaries of sleep are important to record as an ADHD
individual may lack routine and their bedtime may vary according to the day’s
activities and whether they suddenly remember to do something just before they
go to bed. Having a fixed bedtime helps to induce a regular pattern of sleep and
can reduce difficulties falling asleep. For example, if someone frequently does
not go to bed until after 2 am and then tries to ‘catch-up’ on some sleep by going
to bed at 9.30 pm, they may find it difficult to fall asleep.
9. Time fallen asleep. Although this is difficult to record directly, people generally have a sense of roughly when they have fallen asleep because they do not
remember seeing their alarm clock after a certain time.
10. Waking times during night. People with ADHD may be more likely to get out of
bed due to feelings of restlessness, and (impulsively) engage in activities such
as watching television and playing computer games. These provide stimulation
and make it more difficult to return back naturally to sleep. However, other
people may lie awake and have restless thoughts that stop them from going back
to sleep.
11. Waking time in morning. The individual may not have a consistent pattern of
when to sleep and when to wake, so this can lead to them oversleeping or waking too early. Early morning waking and then lying awake ruminating can be
associated with low mood and depression. However, sometimes individuals feel
that if they have been awake for a great deal of the night, they are too tired to get
up in the morning so lie in bed.
12. Total hours of sleep. This is a useful quantative way of measuring any improvement (or deterioration) in sleep. It will also allow the therapist to explore any
expectations of the number of hours of sleep an individual believes they should
be getting per night. As described above, sometimes expectations can be too
high and some normalisation of what is usual can help an individual realise that
they are maybe even sleeping too much.
13. Quality of sleep. The client should rate the quality of each night’s sleep on a
Likert scale from 0 (worst possible night’s sleep) to 10 (fully relaxed and refreshed in the morning). This area is where clients may have most complaints.
Conversely, this is the area where the client is most likely to see improvements
during therapy.

SLEEP PROBLEMS 227

The example provided in Table 12.3 illustrates how Jane’s napping during the day
affected how late she went to bed in the evening and the amount of time she slept at
night. Caffeine and alcohol consumption also affected the time she was able to fall
asleep and the quality of sleep she gained. For example, on Friday when she was
out late drinking wine with friends, she only managed three hours with very poor
quality sleep. Eating late at night also seemed to affect her sleep. However, her sleep
quantity and quality were strongly related to her activity before going to bed, such as
last-minute preparation of coursework, and the anxieties this caused. The night when
she had the most and best quality of sleep was Thursday when she went to bed early
but then she overslept. This shows how important it can be to have regular times to
go to bed and get up in the morning so that a sleep-wake rhythm can be achieved.

MANAGING SLEEP DIFFICULTIES
If the client takes longer than 30 minutes to fall asleep on most nights, then the first
step is to review bedtime routines. ‘Sleep hygiene’ refers to arranging environmental and behavioural factors that are conducive to sleep. For people with insomnia,
the bed and its surroundings can become a signal for being unable to fall asleep and
for the worry and frustration associated with that state. It is possible to ‘undo’ this
association so that the body learns to sleep in bed and view sleep as rewarding.
In order to achieve this, all activities in the bedroom should be stopped except sleep and
intimacy. Visual or physical contact with the bed should be avoided except when going
to sleep. For example, people should avoid activities in the bedroom such as working,
reading, watching television or playing computer games. Sometimes rearranging the
furniture can help by creating a new condition that is not associated with insomnia.
Paradoxically, sleep difficulties can often best be managed by making adjustments
during the day to activities and consumption of food, cigarettes and alcohol. Preparing for going to bed is also crucial for the individual to develop a routine so that their
body is expecting sleep from regular cues. Whilst in bed, the client should aim to be
relaxed, even if they are awake, and they should get out of bed if they feel uncomfortable or unable to sleep. Strategies to cue waking up can complete an intervention
as sometimes the individual may be anxious about going to sleep in case they do
not wake up on time. Table 12.4 provides a selection of behavioural strategies which
may be tried at appropriate times. The Companion Website includes a version of the
strategies which clients may find helpful.
In order to improve the sleep of Jane, the mature student (described in Table 12.3), the
therapist suggested avoiding all sleeping during the day. She also developed a routine
whereby she did not drink any tea or coffee after 4 pm, she ate her evening meal at
7 pm and did not drink any alcohol during the week. At 11 pm, she changed into her
nightclothes, brushed her teeth then sat for 30 minutes in the living room listening
to relaxing music and reading a magazine. Then she went to bed at 11.30 pm. For the

228 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 12.4

Behavioural sleep strategies

During the day
Avoid taking naps and do not lie down
When the client is feeling tired, it can be tempting for them to ‘cat nap’. Whilst this is a
quick fix with a short-term gain (and therefore appealing to individuals with ADHD), it is
likely to disrupt sleep in the night. If the client feels particularly tired during the day, they
may take rests without lying down, or alternatively try to distract themselves by becoming
involved in a more energising task
Relax by reading/listening to music if necessary
Instead of sleeping during the day, the client should be encouraged to read or listen to
music (but not in the bedroom). If they perform these activities when feeling tired, they
may become conditionally paired with this feeling, and thus induce this state in the evening
when the individual needs to sleep
Make a list of the activities for the following day
This prevents mental rehearsal at night when the client is attempting to get to sleep but
trying not to forget certain things they need to do the next day
Eating and drinking
The client should avoid heavy meals just before going to bed as this can cause increased
alertness. Spicy and acidic foods may cause indigestion, which will affect sleep. However,
light snacks that are high in carbohydrates but low in sugar can be helpful before going to
bed. Also, drinking too much liquid in the few hours before bed may mean that sleep is
disturbed by a need to go the toilet in the night, so clients should limit their liquid intake in
the later part of the evening
Smoking
Nicotine is a stimulant, which acts in a similar way to caffeine and stimulant medication,
and therefore should be avoided just before bedtime. Smokers may therefore have reduced
REM sleep and only sleep very lightly. Some heavy smokers may wake up a few hours after
going to sleep due to nicotine withdrawal. It is advisable for people to avoid smoking if they
wake up in the night
Alcohol
The effects of alcohol on sleep are counterintuitive. Although alcohol can make drinkers
feel drowsy, it actually prevents people from achieving REM and deeper sleep. Alcohol
induces only a light sleep and therefore the restorative processes cannot occur, and
individuals may be woken up more easily. Alcohol consumption should be avoided or kept
to a minimum when treating a sleep disorder
Before sleep
Maintain a consistent bedtime
Irregularities in bedtimes for people with ADHD are often determined by what is
happening around them. For example, starting to watch a film late at night, being invited
to go for late-night drinks. This should be minimised where possible during the sleep
intervention as having a consistent bedtime allows a routine to develop where sleep is
expected at a certain time
Changing bedtime to when normally get to sleep.
For example, if a client is only getting four hours of sleep per night, then they should only be
allowed four hours in bed but this can be gradually increased by 15–30 minutes per night

SLEEP PROBLEMS 229
Table 12.4

(continued)

Follow a routine
An hour or more before going to bed, the client should allow a ‘winding down’ period,
which can be organised into a routine. For example, reading enjoyable magazines or books,
listening to music, having a bath
Get ready for bed
This should be done before the client gets tired or commences the winding down routine in
order to avoid waking themselves up by the routine. For example, brushing teeth and washing
or showering can wake up the individual as these activities are also associated with the morning
Only get into bed when tired
The aim is to associate the bedroom with rapid onset of sleep
In bed
Avoid activities incompatible with sleeping
For example, watching TV or listening to the radio, eating, reading in bed should all be
avoided. The bed must be associated with sleep and intimacy, and nothing else
Do not lie awake for long periods
If the client is unable to fall asleep within 30 minutes, they should get out of bed, move to
another room and only return to bed when they are ready to fall asleep. They should make
sure the room is not at a noticeably different temperature from that of the bedroom. If they
return to bed and still cannot sleep, this stage should be repeated. The goal is to minimise
the amount of time spent in bed ruminating about lack of sleep
Awakening
Regular alarm
The client should be encouraged to try and wake with an alarm and rise at the same time
each day, even at weekends
Two alarm clocks
It may be helpful to set two alarm clocks. The client can take their medication when woken by
the first clock in order to improve their concentration and focus for their morning routine. The
client should also set a second alarm clock at a time when their medication is likely to have begun
acting. This could be positioned at a distance that requires them to leave the bed to turn it off
Hide alarm clock
Exposure to bright light or sunshine soon after waking can help the client wake naturally
and feel more refreshed from their sleep. This could be done using lamps, which are on
timers. A partner who wakes earlier than the individual can help by throwing open the
curtains. This can help regulate the body’s natural clock

first few nights, Jane found that she still could not sleep, so she was advised to return
to the living room and continue reading, or just sat still, before returning to bed. She
set her alarm for 7.30 am every morning and took her medication and listened to the
radio before a second alarm roused her at 8.00 am when she got out of bed. The total
number of hours asleep gradually increased to a more regular 7–8 hours per night and
her quality of sleep improved. She also reported feeling less worried about the amount
of sleep she was getting as this had been preoccupying her thoughts during the day.

230 ADHD IN ADULTS

SLEEP AND RUMINATION
Ironically, people with ADHD often report lying awake restlessly worrying about
not being able to sleep. Worry and chronic anxiety can affect the amount and quality
of sleep at all stages of the process:

• Before falling asleep – worrying thoughts can cause and maintain insomnia
• During sleep – day time stress and chronic anxiety can be associated with restless
‘tossing and turning’ or even nightmares
• After awakening – worrying thoughts and anxiety can occur after nightmare/

night terrors and prevent sleep. Also when individuals with ADHD experience
low mood, their sleep may be affected and this can lead to reduced quality of
sleep through the night accompanied by early waking. However, they may also
find it extremely difficult to get up and face the day.

For individuals with ADHD, mood disturbance can also be exacerbated by a lack of
sleep, whereby irritability, ‘frayed nerves’ and snappiness can lead to social problems. These difficulties can be self-perpetuating if others begin responding in a
negative way towards the individual and cause them to feel more negative about
themselves. The sleep hygiene techniques described above can be particularly useful
for treating comorbid low mood and anxiety.
As for other affective symptoms, a cycle between thoughts, feelings and behaviours can
maintain sleep difficulties. For example, a client who is unable to fall asleep may start
thinking that they will not be able to perform the following day because they will be
too tired, they then become anxious and frustrated about not being able to sleep, which
means that they are less likely to sleep. They may then get up and try and carry out
tasks, which they hope will prevent them from underachieving during the following day,
but this makes them more alert and even less likely to be able to sleep during the night.
Examples of the thoughts, feelings and behaviours that mediate sleeplessness are
provided below:

• Thoughts:

‘If I don’t get seven or eight hours sleep, I haven’t had enough sleep’
‘If I don’t sleep, I won’t be able to get up’
‘I won’t be able to concentrate tomorrow and will forget things’
‘Lying in bed with eyes closed is more restful than sitting up’

• Feelings:

Anxiety, frustration, worry

• Behaviours:

Unable to fall asleep
Surfing the net

SLEEP PROBLEMS 231

Have a night cap
Get up and pace around
Get up and do activities in case by tomorrow they have been forgotten
Get up and look for something that may have been lost.
For example, the client Jane reported that when she woke up in the morning, she was
already planning how she could fit extra sleep into her day in order to catch up on
sleep missed during the night. Before she got into bed in the evening, she would be
concerned that she would not fall asleep and then would frequently check her alarm
clock and calculate the maximum number of hours more she could sleep before she
had to get up.
Behavioural strategies to overcome sleep problems were outlined previously in
Table 12.4. If these problems are associated with ruminative thinking, then it may
also be helpful for the client to engage in the anxiety reduction techniques provided in Chapter 9. They may also be low in mood and benefit from work focusing
on this issue, as suggested in Chapter 11. However, there are also several simple
techniques which can be useful when working with clients who have specific concerns about their ability to sleep, which target the thoughts, feelings and behaviours described above (see Table 12.5, which is also presented on the Companion
Website).

Table 12.5

Mood-related sleep strategies

Thoughts
Have designated ‘worry time’ well before winding down. Worries can be written down so
they do not need to be rehearsed or remembered until the following day. Calming self-talk
may also be useful by rehearsing statements such as ‘A few hours sleep is better than no
hours sleep’
Feelings
Relaxation techniques can help to reduce anxious feelings. For example, the client could
imagine having their thoughts switched off or perform one of several simple techniques:

1. Counting from one to ten steadily but pausing after one of the numbers, e.g.
1 (pause) 2 – 3 – 4 – 5 – 6 – 7 – 8 – 9 – 10
1 – 2 (pause) 3 – 4 – 5 – 6 – 7 – 8 – 9 – 10

2. Progressive muscle relaxation (see Chapter 9)
3. Deep breathing
4. Guided imagery/distraction – imagine a pleasant scene: what can you see?
what can you hear? what can you smell? what can you feel?
Behaviour
Behavioural strategies have been outlined previously in Table 12.4. If anxiety is driving the
sleep problem, then the ‘thought’ and ‘feeling’ components should additionally be targeted.

232 ADHD IN ADULTS

CONCLUSIONS
The techniques described above can be helpful for people with ADHD regardless
of whether sleep is their main complaint or their sleep problems are associated with
other symptoms. Gaining an understanding of the nature of a sleep disorder and
careful monitoring of the difficulties using a Sleep Diary will provide useful clues
as to how best to intervene. Strategies can be implemented through the day, before
bedtime, through the night and in the morning. Routines may be particularly useful
for people with ADHD, who are often very active late at night trying to catch up
with tasks they have not completed during the day. Change is usually monitored by
the client spontaneously, who will quickly notice any improvement in the quantity
and quality of sleep. However, it is also useful to repeat the exercise of monitoring
sleep shown in Table 12.3 in order to objectively demonstrate improvements and the
changes that underpin them.

13
