IMPULSIVITY

Behavioural and cognitive disinhibition are characteristics of ADHD associated with
the lack of ability to control either behaviour, speech or certain thought processes. This
means that someone with ADHD is likely to say the first thing that comes into their
head, such as expressing feelings, thoughts and opinions without weighing up the consequences. They may also act without considering the consequences of their behaviour.
In a way, they do not have an internal ‘brake’ that allows them to sift out inappropriate
responses or behaviours. This is sometimes referred to as having poor ‘response inhibition’; that is, they are unable to inhibit a prepotent response. Poor impulse control
can cause problems for ADHD individuals in their social interactions. They may blurt
out inappropriate comments and inadvertently offend people. Nevertheless in some
circumstances the tendency to act on the ‘spur-of-the-moment’ can be advantageous
as it means individuals are willing to take risks that may pay off, whereas someone
without ADHD is likely to be more cautious and perhaps miss out on opportunities.
Impulsivity or a lack of inhibition can also lead to an increase in divergent or lateral
thinking, which allows people with ADHD to be creative. Indeed, there are several
successful entrepreneurs and celebrities in the arts and music industries who have disclosed their ADHD and attribute their success in part to having the disorder.
However, the tendency to act and think in an impulsive way can also bring great
disadvantages. People with ADHD tend not to engage in a systematic decisionmaking process or consider alternative perspectives. The need for immediate gratification may make individuals seem demanding, exhausting and tactless and they may
be perceived as antisocial and irritating company. They may also seem inconsiderate
and fickle as they can become impulsively enthusiastic about doing something but
then quickly lose interest in favour of something new. They may be viewed as selfcentred individuals who lack consideration for the feelings and needs of others. This
presentation is likely to have negative social consequences resulting in the clients
themselves feeling misunderstood and socially isolated.
This chapter examines the nature of the deficit that underpins impulsive behaviour
in adults with ADHD. The current theoretical explanations are discussed along with

114 ADHD IN ADULTS
a description of the typical impulse control problems that may be exhibited. The relevance of impulsivity to antisocial, delinquent and criminal behaviour is considered,
particularly with regard to the interaction of comorbid conduct disorder and ADHD.
Methods are provided for assisting individuals in identifying situations in which
they may be vulnerable to responding in an impulsive way and determine appropriate control and coping strategies. Various cognitive-behavioural self-monitoring and
self-restraint strategies are presented within the chapter. These include techniques
to improve control, including the use of self-talk, distraction and self-instructional
training.

THEORETICAL EXPLANATIONS
There are two competing explanations for why impulsivity arises in the disorder
of ADHD. One is that there is a primary executive functioning deficit in inhibitory
control mechanisms (e.g. Barkley & Biederman, 1997), such as the mechanisms
that stop a person from running out across a busy road, or stop someone from blurting out a tactless comment. The probability of successful inhibition seems to relate
directly to the length of the ‘stopping’ interval; that is, when people with ADHD are
under pressure to inhibit a response in a short space of time, they are more likely
to make mistakes. However, if they are given longer to inhibit a response, they are
more accurate and hence less ‘impulsive’. This concept has strong implications for
intervention, as ADHD clients must learn to schedule time and be encouraged to
‘stop and think’ in order to reduce failures through impulsive mistakes.
An alternative theory is that the disinhibition or impulsivity associated with ADHD
is due to aversion to delay (e.g. Sonuga-Barke et al., 1992). According to this perspective, impulsive behaviour is due to a choice to avoid delay, which people with
ADHD find aversive. The theory considers that impulsivity is underpinned by a
preference for immediate or short-term rewards and an inability to delay gratification in the longer term. This means that individuals are more motivated to receive
a current reward even if it is less valuable than a more valuable longer-term reward.
This has implications for everyday functioning where much of our behaviour, particularly in adult life, is governed by the principle of ‘good things come to those
who wait’. For example, most people find that the prospect of a salary at the end
of the week or month is sufficient to keep them adequately motivated at work each
day. However, for someone with ADHD, if they have become dissatisfied and/or
irritated at work for some reason (e.g. bored with the work; annoyed with a colleague), they may be inclined to quit their job, feeling that the short-term reward
of getting out of a situation is worth more to them than the long-term reward of
being paid. Unfortunately the prospect of immediate reward and temptation may
lure some individuals into delinquent and/or criminal behaviour. The implications
for treatment strategies are to work with the need for immediate gratification by
breaking down tasks into smaller stages and providing short-term goals that can
be rewarded.

IMPULSIVITY 115

THE NATURE OF THE DEFICIT
There are several ways in which impulsivity is manifested in ADHD adults. People
can seem to be too ‘quick off the mark’; that is, individuals tend to respond before
instructions have been completed or before they have acquired all the information
necessary for starting a task. There are also difficulties when ADHD adults ‘act
without thinking’, where individuals respond without first considering all the possible response options and their implications. Alternatively, a person may verbally
or physically lash out at someone who has upset them without considering the social
and/or legal implications. They focus on short-term rewards as opposed to long-term
rewards, for example students may have difficulty resisting a readily available reward, such as an evening out, which may prevent them from achieving a longer-term
goal, such as submitting their coursework on time.
Impulsivity can be conceptualised in two ways: ‘behavioural impulsivity’ and ‘cognitive impulsivity’. Behavioural impulsivity refers to the inability to inhibit physical
or verbal actions due to premature and/or over-rapid responsiveness. This is manifested as an inability to resist doing or saying inappropriate things, for example
ADHD individuals may hit out at someone or something in a fit of temper and/or
make hurtful comments. Behavioural impulsivity is associated with excessive attraction to immediate reward.
Cognitive impulsivity relates to disorganised behaviour associated with problems of
executive function. This underpins forgetfulness, poor planning and poor time management. For example, clients may misappraise a situation or the intentions of others
and make rash important decisions based on inadequate information.
Neuropsychological measures are available to help distinguish between the two
concepts. Behavioural impulsivity is commonly measured using tasks assessing
response inhibition; that is, the ability to inhibit a salient response when it is inappropriate. People with ADHD have been shown to exhibit impaired performance
on such tasks, for example ‘stop’ tasks and ‘go-no-go’ tasks (Rubia, Oosterlaan,
Sergeant, Brandeis & Leeuwen, 1998; Rubia et al., 1999, 2000). ‘Stop’ tasks typically involve responding according to certain contingencies, for example pressing a key on a computer in response to identifying cued target items. Hence, the
individual is required to press a button every time they see a target on the screen.
However, on occasions the testee is instructed to do the opposite, in other words, to
stop responding in this way (by withholding their response), and this can be challenging for a person with ADHD who is likely to respond in the cued way and make
lots of errors. Similarly, for ‘go-no-go’ tasks, the individual is typically required to
respond to certain targets (i.e. ‘go’), but not respond if they are preceded or followed
by another ‘no-go’ target. For example, the individual is required to press a button
every time they see a target on the screen, but if the target is presented with a second
aural or visual cue (e.g. a ‘bleep’, or the target is a different colour), then the individual is required to withhold their response. In such cases, individuals with ADHD

116 ADHD IN ADULTS
have particular difficulty co-ordinating their response pattern and make errors by
‘misfiring’ at the wrong time (i.e. they have difficulty withholding their response).
However, performance may improve if individuals are provided with an increase in
time between stimuli as this gives them more time in which to respond.
Behavioural impulsivity is also assessed using a task called the Matching Familiar
Figures Test (Cairnes & Cammock, 1978), which assesses impulsiveness versus reflectiveness in cognitive style. The test involves identifying target pictures among
five distractors with both speed and accuracy. It is similar to playing ‘spot the difference’ between pictures. Compared with people without ADHD, individuals with
ADHD tend to respond rapidly and make an increased number of errors by selecting
incorrect responses. This means that they tend to favour speed over accuracy and
adopt a ‘trial and error’ approach to problem solving.
Cognitive impulsivity can be assessed neuropsychologically with various executive
functioning paradigms as well as through careful observations and anecdotal reports
of behaviour. The ability to co-ordinate a series of tasks and form a strategy can be
assessed using the Modified Six Elements subtest of the Behavioural Assessment of
Dysexecutive Syndrome (Wilson et al., 1996). Individuals with ADHD are more likely
to break rules by impulsively changing task without planning a sequence. Another test
from the same battery that can be used to assess planning skills is the Zoo Map task.
This task requires the individual to assimilate information from rules and instructions
about how they should organise a visit to the zoo and form a plan before plotting their
route on a map. People with ADHD typically do not take the time to plan and impulsively begin the route without formulating an effective sequence. This difficulty with
planning was also found by Young et al. (in submission) where ADHD participants
were less likely to adjust their planning time according to task difficulty for the Tower
of London, a test of problem-solving.
It is important to bear in mind that, whilst deficits of cognitive impulsivity may
be exhibited on some neuropsychological measures, they are most likely to be extremely debilitating in everyday life. Thus, it is very important to question the client
carefully about how they cope with completing chores and tasks on a daily basis,
especially those that require sustained effort and concentration, or those in which
the client lacks interest or motivation to complete. Indeed, one advantage of the
Behavioural Assessment of Dysexecutive Syndrome (Wilson et al., 1996) is that it is
an ecologically valid battery of executive functioning tests which translate relatively
well from the artificial testing room into real life. Nevertheless, some individuals are
still able to perform in an assessment setting, in other words control their cognitive
impulsivity when effectively forced to do so, but have extreme difficulty in doing this
on a day-to-day basis.
Table 7.1 provides a summary of the typical impulse control behaviours (and associated problems) that are commonly reported by people with ADHD, or their friends
and family.

IMPULSIVITY 117
Table 7.1

Typical impulse control problems experienced by people with ADHD

Consequence
‘blindness’

People with ADHD find it difficult to consider the consequences
of their behaviour before acting. For example, the social
consequence of blurting out gossip or interrupting people

Difficulty waiting

ADHD can greatly affect someone’s ability to queue or wait for
their turn. This is particularly prominent in shopping queues
when there is a delay

Motivation for
immediate
gratification

People with ADHD are more prone to opt for a short-term
reward that involves less effort than working for longer periods
and applying more effort for a larger reward

Taking short cuts

Individuals with ADHD are notorious for taking ‘short cuts’,
which may lead to reduced accuracy or a lower quality of
outcome

Demanding behaviour

People with ADHD may seem demanding and self-centred if
someone else controls access to what they are wanting

Lack of insight

Situations in which they are likely to be impulsive may not be
immediately obvious to someone with ADHD

Abrupt movements

Motor movements can be affected by impulsivity, such as getting
up out of a chair suddenly, or snatching items from another
person

Reckless driving

Driving can cause problems for an individual with ADHD who
has difficulty waiting at traffic lights, or driving patiently
behind slower drivers. Poor impulse control on the road
can lead to many driving violations, commonly including
speeding, jumping lights, but also may be more serious when
greater risks are taken, such as overtaking when it is unsafe to
do so

Rule breaking

Behavioural impulsivity may often present as disobedience or
deliberate violation of instructions

Recklessness

Impulsivity can also manifest itself as recklessness due to the
tendency to engage in dangerous activities without considering
possible consequences

Jumping to conclusions

Jumping to conclusions is a general problem for individuals with
ADHD. They may be more likely to misinterpret ambiguous
situations, make assumptions based on very little information
and also catastrophise

Incurring debts

Impulsive spending may lead individuals to buy items without
considering whether they can afford them or whether they are
necessary

Novelty seeking
behaviour

A search for thrills and novelty may stem from an excessive
attraction to immediate reward

Anxiety

Anxiety may lead to impulsive avoidance of aversive situations
or exacerbate impulse control difficulties

118 ADHD IN ADULTS
The common theme for all these behaviours is that such individuals do not think
ahead or consider the consequences of their actions. It is not that they are unaware of
the difference between appropriate and inappropriate behaviour or that one solution/
response to a problem is better than another. The difficulty arises because they do
not think or consider every option. Their decision-making processes may be impulse
driven, resulting in a tendency to make important choices rapidly and without careful consideration or planning (also see Chapter 6 on Problem-Solving). A model of
therapy should therefore aim to teach self-monitoring and self-regulation skills (e.g.
‘to stop and think’), train the individual to consider consequences of action and generate appropriate and constructive alternatives.

ANTISOCIAL, DELINQUENT AND CRIMINAL BEHAVIOUR
Childhood ADHD is frequently associated with conduct problems and just as the
developmental trajectory of ADHD symptomatology is heterogeneous, so is the developmental trajectory of children with ADHD and Conduct Disorder. Moffitt (1993)
has theorised that there are two fundamentally divergent categories of delinquent
adolescents. The ‘adolescence-limited’ group is characterised by noteworthy criminal activity that arises for the first time in early to mid-adolescence and features
non-aggressive behaviour that typically desists by late adolescence. The ‘life-course
persistent’ antisocial group is characterised by overt aggression in adolescence, typified by marked defiant and aggressive behaviour from a young age. Moffitt suggests
that the delinquency of this group is associated with pre-existing cognitive and/or
behavioural deficits, including neuropsychological dysfunction, family disharmony
and attention deficits/hyperactivity. Indeed, a longitudinal epidemiological study of
young hyperactive boys into young adulthood showed that hyperactivity was a risk
factor in young men for later antisocial problems including violence, even after the
coexistence of initial conduct problems was taken into account (Taylor et al., 1996).
This may reflect that young children grow up with a ‘double dose’ of risk, characterised by both cognitive and conduct problems. Indeed there is some evidence that cooccurring ADHD and Conduct Disorder is a clinically and genetically more severe
variant of the independent disorders (Thapar, Harrington & McGuffin, 2001).
Irrespective of the additional risk of ADHD, examination of the ‘conduct problem
route’ into criminal behaviour portrays a pathway that often begins with truancy,
bullying, vandalism, verbal and physical aggression. Conduct problems may escalate
in adolescence to become oppositional defiant problems, juvenile delinquency and
criminal behaviour. For adults with ADHD, this delinquent pathway may be further
complicated by the addition of the development of personality problems.
The cognitive deficits of young persons with ADHD may therefore lead them to
progress along increasingly antisocial trajectory. Symptoms may remit far too late for
young people to break out of indoctrination in an antisocial peer group and culture,
and/or purposefully break out of established antisocial patterns of behaviour. Court
records suggest that ADHD is a great risk for juvenile contact with the criminal

IMPULSIVITY 119

justice system (Satterfield, Swanson, Schell & Lee, 1994) and prison studies suggest
that about two-thirds of inmates had childhood ADHD and up to 30% of them continue to be symptomatic in adulthood (Eyestone & Howell, 1994; Dalteg, Lindgren
& Levander, 1999; Rasmussen, Almik & Levander, 2001; Retz et al., 2004; Rosler et
al., 2004). This association may be explained by poor response inhibition in ADHD
individuals resulting in a lack of self-control. Thus, recidivism is likely to be high
and their offending behaviour typified by impetuous, novelty seeking behaviour,
which leads to opportunistic crimes for which they are apprehended.
Such individuals require specialised group treatment programmes that focus on their
criminogenic needs and labile temperament. There is a lack, however, of structured,
manualised programmes available for an ADHD client group. The R&R2 for ADHD
Youths and Adults (Young & Ross, 2007), which is a new edition of the original Reasoning and Rehabilitation programme (Ross, Fabiano & Ross, 1986), is designed to
yield programmes that have an evidence-base in the reduction of antisocial behaviour
of youths, juvenile delinquents and adult offenders. The R&R2 for ADHD Youths and
Adults programme not only teaches symptom control, skills development and prosocial attitudes, but also involves the training of cognitive processes involved in problem solving. This group programme provides the opportunity to assess whether an
individual has specific skills deficits or needs that will benefit from individual attention
such as interventions outlined in the Young–Bramham Programme modules.

IDENTIFYING THE PROBLEM
So far, the two main aspects of impulsivity have been described; cognitive and behavioural impulsivity. Clients will readily relate to behavioural impulsivity as this is what
they perceive as impeding their performance on a day-to-day basis, such as going ‘offtask’ and never finishing anything; jumping to the wrong conclusions; and losing their
temper. The therapist should direct the client to identify specific situations when they
are likely to respond in an impulsive manner. This should not present a great problem
but if it seems difficult, the client should start by looking back at times or behaviours
that they regret in retrospect. In particular they should identify problems that have
occurred on a regular basis as these may be used to monitor progress in treatment.
Through discussion, exploration and Socratic questioning regarding these situations
(as well as observation of the client’s behaviour in sessions), target behaviours may
be determined that are suitable for treatment. As with all behavioural measurements
however, the target behaviour must be specific and clearly defined by the client and
therapist. The frequency of the target behaviour can then be measured either in the
course of a session (e.g. number of interruptions) or outside of the session by the client, friend, partner or family member (e.g. shouting at motorists whilst driving), or by
using an objective measure (e.g. a record of weekly shopping purchases).
The ultimate aim is for the client to take responsibility for monitoring their own impulsive behaviour. As individuals develop greater self-awareness of their behaviour,
learning to self-monitor in this way may in itself act as a reduction strategy. Specific

120 ADHD IN ADULTS
interventions should be discussed collaboratively, selected strategies implemented,
reviewed and evaluated. This process is called the IMPULSE method of selfmonitoring and regulating poor impulse control. Table 7.2 describes the IMPULSE
method applied to the problem a client had with making shopping purchases on
impulse. This happened so frequently that the client was getting into debt. A version
of Table 7.2 that is suitable for use in sessions is provided on the Companion Website. Once clients have successfully mastered the IMPULSE system they should be
encouraged to apply it to a range of problem behaviours (including those identified
by others).

COGNITIVE BEHAVIOURAL TREATMENT STRATEGIES
Whilst behavioural management plans are helpful to adapt specific behaviours that
occur on a frequent basis, the primary objective of treatment is for the individual to
develop and maintain their management plan in order that in time this may become
more generalised. The aim is for the individual to begin to cope more generally with
impulsive responding. This involves learning techniques to monitor and control impulsive behaviour. There are several techniques, all of which encourage the individual
to ‘stop and think’. These include learning to apply cognitive strategies, such as selftalk, self-instructional training, double-checks and distraction techniques. Not all
strategies will be helpful, but it is likely that the client will find some of these methods
of benefit. This can only be determined by trying them out and evaluating progress.
Wherever possible, appropriate behaviour should be modelled. In addition, some
individuals may benefit from watching recordings of themselves acting in role plays
that require them to behave in an appropriate manner as well as in an inappropriate
manner. When playing back the recording, the client should be encouraged to take
a different perspective of their behaviour by imagining a friend or family member
observing them. What would be going through their mind? Alternatively, the client
could be asked to imagine that they are observing the behaviour of a friend or family
member. What would they make of it? Would they view the interaction differently?
Role-plays are particularly helpful in perspective taking as this gives the client the
opportunity of considering the personal and social consequences of behaviour.
Be wary of cognitive avoidance, which may present as a lack of motivation. It may
well be distressing for the individual to develop better insight into their own behaviour
and its impact on others. This may cause clients to avoid facing up to past mistakes,
which have been financially and/or emotionally costly, and/or painful memories. If
this occurs, it may hamper progress in treatment. In some cases, individuals may
deliberately attempt to sabotage treatment by disengagement (this representing a
‘secondary gain’ as it provides the short-term reward of removing themselves from
anxiety-provoking treatment). Being sensitive to the client’s feelings and acknowledging their difficulty by taking a non-judgemental and open approach is likely to
be helpful.

IMPULSIVITY 121
Table 7.2

The IMPULSE method for identifying and monitoring behaviours

I: identify the behaviour

For example:
Impulsive spending on credit cards

M: make the behaviour explicit

For example:
Buying CDs and clothes when the
client does not have the money

P: Peer/partner monitoring

For example:
Credit card bills brought to the session.
Partner can monitor new purchases
being brought into the house

U: Understanding and self-

monitoring
For example:
For all items purchased, evaluation
of whether they were planned and
whether the client could afford them

L: List plans to tackle the problem

The target behaviour should be chosen by the
client. Not all impulsivity is problematic to the
individual. It is important that they identify and
target areas that they are motivated to change. For
example, interrupting others and not taking turns
appropriately in conversation may lead to problems
with relationships and isolation
Developing a clear definition of the problem is crucial if
change is to be usefully measured. Vague targets such
as ‘stop being impulsive’ are both difficult to measure
and difficult to achieve. It is more sensible to use
operationalised behaviours such as ‘driving over the
speed limit’ or ‘interrupting others’
It may be possible for the therapist to monitor some
behaviours such as interruptions in a therapy session.
However, other behaviours may be less easy to
assess. Video cameras might be usefully employed to
monitor some behaviours. In some situations it may be
possible to enrol the help of a partner, friend or family
member, who can count behaviours such as changing
the television channel or staying seated at mealtimes
If the IMPULSE method has been monitored by a
person other than the client, the responsibility
for monitoring should next be passed to the
client. It may be helpful to compare reports of
behaviour in order to check that the client is able
to recognise the target behaviours appropriately.
Self-monitoring can serve as an intervention in
itself as it may encourage recognition of triggers or
antecedents to behaviour

For example:
Planning a weekly budget

Once the behaviour has been monitored and a
baseline rate has been established, the client and
the therapist collaborate to form an intervention
plan (see strategies section below)

S

The client applies the agreed strategy

: Strategy implementation
For example:
Carrying out budget

E

: Evaluation of strategy
For example:
1. Feedback from client, particularly
regarding times when they have
resisted temptation
2. Count of number of unplanned
purchases

Evaluation of the strategy success is performed
via two methods: (1) the client should be invited
to give feedback about the strategy – what has
been helpful/unhelpful, etc; and (2) there is a
repeat monitoring period in order to establish the
frequency of target behaviours. This is compared
to the original baseline measure

122 ADHD IN ADULTS

Self-talk
Self-talk is essentially proactive thinking. To a certain extent, everyone engages in
self-talk, sometimes even out loud. People often think through plans in their heads
for various situational outcomes and rehearse potential responses. The client can be
taught to apply self-talk as a cognitive technique to interrupt an automatic dysfunctional thinking process, for example by saying words like ‘Stop’, ‘Control’, ‘Look
before you leap’, ‘Think before you speak’. If the client is in a state of high emotional
arousal then this will exacerbate cognitive deficits resulting in them feeling overwhelmed and confused. Self-talk, such as ‘stay calm’, ‘I can do this’, at the same
time as visualising (pre-determined) calming images is likely to help the individual
to feel more in control. Potential calming images should be discussed and tried out
in sessions in order that the client may develop a repertoire of helpful and restful
visual images that can be accessed and cued as necessary (e.g. a Caribbean beach;
sitting on top of a mountain; an English garden; an evening sunset). Once thinking
has been interrupted in this way, the client should be encouraged to stand back and
take a different perspective, such as ‘Is there another way I can think about this and
resolve this problem?’; ‘What would my mother, brother, friends say?’
Self-talk must be tailored to individual needs by identifying what the client finds helpful.
This needs to be achieved collaboratively in sessions and tested out and evaluated in ‘real
life’ settings, such as by setting up ‘mini-experiments’. Once useful self-talk has been
identified, this should be practised when an individual is not acting on an impulse, but is
carrying out day-to-day activities that do not require decision making. For example, the
self-talk can be rehearsed when driving on a clear road. The more experience an individual has using self-talk, the more likely they will apply it in the heat of the moment.

Self-instructional Training
A second step towards ‘taking the heat out of an impulse’ is self-instructional training.
Self-talk interrupts a dysfunctional thinking process and, once this has been achieved, the
individual must then learn to direct themselves towards more positive functional thinking. Self-instructional training helps the client to stand back from a situation, appraise it
from different perspectives, evaluate possible responses and outcomes, re-appraise and
select an appropriate response. This is achieved by teaching the client to engage in selfdirected purposeful instructions. Until the client becomes used to this process it should
be enacted out loud in sessions. For example, Julie, a client with ADHD, has difficulty
waiting in line to pay for groceries in a supermarket. If the line is very long she invariably gets irritated and restless and walks out of the shop leaving her shopping behind. In
this case, the therapist and client devised the following management plan:
1. Whenever possible, Julie did her shopping at more quiet periods during the day.
2. When she had to wait in line and began to feel restless and irritated and had
thoughts that she should leave the shop, she employed self-talk by saying to herself ‘stop’, ‘calm down’.

IMPULSIVITY 123

3. Next Julie evaluated her options in a self-directed thought process, e.g. ‘if I walk
out of the shop I will not have achieved my goal of getting the shopping done; that
means that I will have to make time to come back to the shop at a later time and
I will have to change my plans for this evening; the shop may still be busy later
on and I may not get my shopping today; I have run out of cereal so I will have to
go to work without eating breakfast. If I stay, I can cope with feelings of irritation
by occupying my thoughts using a distraction technique; I will have my shopping
and can have what I want for breakfast; I can meet my friends this evening’.
4. Julie then applied selected distraction techniques (see Table 7.4).
5. Once the shopping had been completed, Julie rewarded herself for achieving her
goal, e.g. by having a chocolate bar when she leaves the supermarket.
The most common obstacle to success is the ADHD individual’s desire and motivation
for immediate gratification. An immediate or short-term reward, such as leaving the
shop to avoid feelings of irritability and restlessness, is preferred over the longer-term
reward of purchasing the shopping. Thus, consequential thinking (i.e. evaluating
potential outcomes, their merits and disadvantages) is an important component to any
management plan. This may be introduced to the client by encouraging them to rehearse
a strategy in sessions called CONTROL (see Table 7.3). CONTROL is a process in
which the client engages in self-talk to stop dysfunctional thinking, makes self-directed
statements and/or instructions and considers options and alternatives. The CONTROL
Table 7.3

The process of CONTROL

C: Control

In order to interrupt a dysfunctional thinking process, the person
should say (either aloud or to themselves) ‘CONTROL’ as
a thought-stopping technique. In addition, they may benefit
from temporarily removing themselves from the situation

O: ‘Off-line’ processing

Self-talk and self-instructions are applied to anchor attention
to calmer images and an emotionally neutral state

N: New solutions

Alternative solutions are generated by using self-directed
statements. Rationalisation and problem-solving
techniques will additionally be helpful (see Chapter 6)

T: Test solutions

Solutions can be tested through mental rehearsal, and predicting
outcomes, e.g. I can (1) buy the new TV now on credit but
have less money each month for a year, (2) save to buy the
TV and have it in six month’s time, (3) buy a cheaper one, etc.

R: Re-evaluation

Once the options have been considered, the most preferable
can be chosen by reviewing the client’s goals

O: ‘On-line’ processing

Once a decision has been made, this should be carried out,
i.e. the solution becomes ‘on-line’. Determine and include a
reward for successful engagement of the CONTROL process

L: Look for benefits

In order to further positively reinforce the CONTROL
process, evaluate outcome by examining advantages and
positive outcome

124 ADHD IN ADULTS
process is achieved by teaching the client to interrupt their dysfunctional thoughts
(which triggers them to go ‘off-line’) and engage in a sequential thinking process
whereby they employ techniques to lessen emotional arousal, generate alternative
options and evaluate these options before going back ‘on-line’ to carry out a solution.
Consequential thinking is a particularly powerful tool if the client is able to write down
the advantages and disadvantages of potential outcomes, although in some situations
this will not be possible. The most important aspect of this technique, however, is that
the client learns to introduce an additional feedback loop or circuit in their thinking
process, i.e. the ‘off-line’ stage. In order to facilitate the introduction of the process
of CONTROL to the client, the client could be provided with cue cards to carry in
their wallet or purse, which can be used to prompt the individual components of the
process. This information has been included on the Companion Website in a format
that could be used for this purpose. The CONTROL process has also been provided
on the Companion Website in a format for use in sessions whereby the client can write
out and test methods to interrupt dysfunctional thoughts. With practice the client will
be able to successfully engage in this process without prompting.

Double Checks
As self-talk and self-instructional training techniques become a more automatic
process; the client should be encouraged to incorporate a system of ‘double checking’ information, assumptions, beliefs, etc. This involves a decision-making process
whereby clients can be encouraged to ‘double-check’ or review decisions by asking
themselves the five questions given in Table 7.4.
It is important that the individual keeps in mind the objective or goal to be achieved.
For example, a common problem for people with ADHD is that they make impulse
purchases. This inclination is not helped by the practice of stores to actively encourage impulse buying by displaying small relatively cheap ‘luxury’ products by checkout cash registers. However, many clients have additionally made relatively large
purchases on impulse, many of which are costly mistakes. It is not uncommon for
ADHD adults to report the presence of numerous unworn unsuitable clothes and/or
unused DIY accessories in their homes.
Learning to postpone decision making, albeit briefly, is thus a good ‘safety guard’
for adults with ADHD. Treatment should focus on getting the person to ‘stop and
think’. Individuals should go through the ‘double-check’ system outlined above and
Table 7.4

‘Double-check’ questions

1. Is this what I really want to happen?
2. For how long have I wanted to do this?
3. What will happen if I do this?
4. What will happen if I don’t do this?
5. What are the longer-term consequences?

IMPULSIVITY 125

it may be helpful for them to have these questions written down on a small card that
they carry around in their purse or wallet. (These are presented on the Companion
Website in a suitable format.) The client should also determine a management plan
in sessions that they then apply ‘in vivo’, for example, leave the shop without making the purchase; walk about for five minutes and go through the questions on a
card, before deciding whether to return to the shop to make the purchase or not. It is
important to measure and evaluate outcome in order to demonstrate success. In this
case, keeping a record of purchases and ‘near purchases’ would reinforce success by
highlighting potential savings from the latter over a set period of time.

Distraction Techniques
One of the most common times that impulsive behaviour is expressed by people with
ADHD is in situations that require a person to wait or queue. An aversion to delay
and lack of tolerance causes individuals to feel bored, frustrated and/or irritated. Every
minute seems like ten and individuals will often favour the short-term reward of giving up and leaving the queue altogether, or deciding not to wait any longer but demand
instant attention instead. The problem with the former scenario is that this means they
will not achieve their objective. The problem with the latter scenario is that they are
very likely to provoke a confrontation. In such situations, the individual could apply distraction techniques to develop better self-control (by distracting themselves from ruminating over their negative thoughts and feelings about the situation). These techniques
can be practised either in advance of difficult situations that are anticipated, or practised
in the imagination. Table 7.5 outlines a variety of distraction techniques which may be
helpful. This table is also provided in handout form on the Companion Website.
Table 7.5

Distraction techniques

Object focus
Person focus

Sensory awareness
Counting
Word generation
Fantasies
Winning the lottery
Puzzles

Focus on an object and describe it in detail
Look at the person in front of you in the queue – imagine
what they might be called, what they do for a living, where
they live, what sort of character they might play in a film,
etc. (Be careful not to stare as this may be perceived as
confrontational or provocative)
Focus on each sense in turn and make a mental list using sight,
hearing, taste, touch and smell
Complicated counting tasks, such as backwards in 7 s, can
provide good distraction
Try to think of as many animals/countries/towns/girls names/
boys names beginning with each letter of the alphabet.
Imagining where you would rather be – on a beach, in the
mountains, swimming…
How would you spend a million pounds?
Crosswords, word-searches, etc., can assist with waiting,
although attentional problems may lead to distractibility

126 ADHD IN ADULTS

External Strategies
It may be helpful if the client invites parents, partners and/or a good friend to attend
some of the sessions (if appropriate) as this provides an opportunity for techniques
to be observed and reinforced outside of the session. Friends or family can support
the client by reminding them of techniques learned in the session, rehearsing the
techniques and providing cues when appropriate for these to be applied ‘in vivo’,
for example by cueing the client to engage in a process of CONTROL, and/or
monitor progress and change in behaviour. Positive feedback by others may also
be an important component of a ‘reward system’ as praise will reinforce successful
and/or appropriate behaviour. Inappropriate or unacceptable behaviour should never
be reinforced. Exceptions or making allowances, such as ‘oh that’s Steve, he’s a
bit crazy’, must be avoided. It is very important that feedback is consistent and
constructive and the individual does not feel personally criticised.

CONCLUSIONS
Learning to develop better impulse control involves the recognition of situations in
which a person is vulnerable to acting without thinking, applying various cognitive
behaviour techniques to cope with that situation, obtaining and rewarding successful
outcome. Once a dysfunctional thinking process has been interrupted, other more
positive or neutral beliefs can be recruited and reviewed to develop a more balanced
view of a situation and the potential methods for dealing with it. Situations can be
rehearsed in order for the client to become accustomed to utilising self-control techniques and potential outcomes evaluated.

PART III

COMORBID AND ASSOCIATED
PROBLEMS

8
