ANXIETY

Anxiety is a common condition in the normal population but its prevalence is
increased in individuals with ADHD for whom comorbidity rates are reported to
be around 25% (e.g. Biederman et al., 1993). Nevertheless, these rates suggest that
the majority of adults with ADHD do not have comorbid anxiety problems, but this
is not our clinical impression. Studies usually apply stringent cut-offs that place an
individual either in or out of a given category, and the studies are helpful in ascertaining the individuals who have a comorbid anxiety problem at a level of functional
impairment. However, there are many clients who may not formally meet a category
of disorder, yet present with anxiety problems that usually stem from past experience and lack of confidence, and which may hamper their progress in treatment.
It could be argued that comorbidity rates of ADHD and anxiety are artefacts of
a similarity between ADHD symptoms and anxiety symptoms (e.g. restlessness,
inattention, ceaseless mental energy). However, a 25% overlap has been reported
in both community and clinic studies (Anderson, Williams, McGee & Silva, 1987;
Biederman, Faraone, Keenan, Steingard & Tsuang, 1991; Millstein, Wilens, Biederman & Spencer, 1997), suggesting that it is unlikely that comorbidity rates simply
reflect symptoms being ‘counted’ twice in about one-quarter of cases. In some cases,
anxiety has been reported as a side effect of stimulant medication and, when this
appears to occur following treatment, then it may be helpful to recommend a psychiatric review and possible change of medication to non-stimulant treatment.
Predisposing factors for comorbid ADHD and anxiety are reported to be perinatal complications, such as late pregnancy difficulties, problems in delivery and the
neonatal period, particularly in those without a familial history of ADHD (SprichBuchminster, Biederman, Milberger, Faraone & Lehman, 1993). Thus, many individuals enter the world with a predisposition to develop anxious and dysfunctional coping
strategies. These usually become expressed following persistent demoralisation and
criticism from others (both real and perceived), causing individuals to become nervous about performing tasks or entering situations. Disadvantages regarding academic attainment, experience of failure in the workplace and difficulty getting along

150 ADHD IN ADULTS
with others can lead adults with ADHD to develop ‘anticipatory anxiety’ regarding
events in which they have previously experienced disappointment and/or failure. In
addition to worries about future events and interpersonal performance, people with
anxiety and ADHD may also become preoccupied with their past behaviours and/or
performance. In such cases, individuals may re-live negative experiences, for example, when they believe they have performed badly; when they believe that people
have judged them to be ‘below standard’ compared with others; and times of embarrassment regarding errors of judgement and/or inappropriate behaviour.
For ADHD adults, anxiety is likely to be expressed in multiple ways. People with
ADHD are more likely to suffer from marked self-consciousness or susceptibility
to embarrassment or humiliation stemming from childhood (Keller et al., 1992).
For most people with ADHD, anxiety starts in school as ‘performance anxiety’,
for example, when they have to stand up in class and read out loud. They make
mistakes and miss out words, or even skip whole lines. Their peers tease them or
bully them; they get laughed at and called names. In such situations, they may either
withdraw or impulsively lash out. Either way, this has negative social consequences
and ADHD children begin to lack the ability to interact confidently with their peers.
Some children over-compensate by trying to overly please others, or by bullying
other children. Others compensate by ‘acting the clown’. They may seek friendships
at school from children outside of their peer set, in other words children older or
younger than themselves, or by preferring the company of adults. With the passing
of time, small anxieties become greater anxieties; this is especially exacerbated as
they progress through education into young adulthood when greater academic and
social demands are encountered. Before they know where they are, the young anxious ADHD child has developed a way of interacting with the world that is based
on uncertainty and insecurity. Anxiety becomes generalised, affecting their beliefs
and confidence regarding whether they will achieve in just about anything that they
attempt to do. This often results in a preoccupation or over-concern about their level
of competence to fulfil various roles and domains of function.
In today’s society, people are evaluated by success, by the job they do, the house they
live in, the car they drive. These icons represent achievement. There are multiple
demands to fulfil, requiring an ability to multi-task and take on multiple responsibilities and roles. Mother, father, wife, husband, daughter, son, friend, congregation
member, youth leader, mentor, manager, employee, executive: these roles have to be
juggled and it can feel as though there are many plates in the air, which have to be
kept spinning. Society is fast and busy, and people with ADHD favour speed over
accuracy, so when they work at a rapid pace they make errors and they fail.
Feeling anxious makes everything else that one has to think or do much harder. Anxiety affects cognitive processes by affecting appraisal and evaluation of situations,
causing a shift of focus internally to exaggerated self-monitoring and self-regulating.
Anxiety increases attentional difficulties and impulsivity. It can inhibit the ability
to reason in a rational way. Thus ADHD individuals, who already have cognitive

ANXIETY

151

vulnerabilities, will become even more vulnerable in an anxiety-provoking situation
by performing less competently. For an individual with, say, generalised anxiety
disorder, this means that they have a ‘double dose’ of cognitive impairments due to
ADHD symptoms becoming much more pronounced at times when they probably
need to focus the most.
This causes a difficulty with the neuropsychological assessment of ADHD symptoms
(attention and impulsivity) as clients may become very anxious in the testing environment. In order to evaluate individual differences in strengths and weaknesses,
many cognitive tests start with very easy items and become progressively more difficult. This means that an individual will consistently reach a stage when they are
unable to answer a question or resolve a problem or puzzle. This highlights their
difficulties and the testing procedure may reinforce underlying beliefs that they are
‘stupid’ and/or remind them of negative school experiences. If individuals become
very anxious they are unlikely to do well and give up easily on tasks, causing them
not to reach their potential and the tester to underestime their level of performance.
Children with comorbid anxiety and ADHD have shown greater impairment on tasks
that put demand on short-term or working memory (Pliszka, 1989); that is, tasks that
involve both active processing and transient storage of information (Baddeley, 1986).
It is possible that anxiety diverts some resources away from processing and storage
within the working memory system. However, it has also been suggested that anxiety has a motivational function as it increases arousal, which may in turn improve
attentional control. This is likely to occur in tasks that do not require retention of
information (i.e. memory processing) but require the individual to inhibit a response,
for example, continuous performance or stop tasks. On such tasks, children with
ADHD and comorbid anxiety may perform better (Pliszka, Hatch, Borcherding &
Rogeness, 1993). Unfortunately, such studies have not been conducted with adults
with comorbid ADHD and anxiety.
Anxiety disorders present in several forms; for example, generalised anxiety, social
phobia, simple phobia, agoraphobia, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder. Our clinical impression is that people with
ADHD are more likely to have generalised anxiety, but social phobia, panic disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder have also been reported by our clients at the
clinic. Of course, these are not mutually exclusive categories and ADHD adults may
have problems associated with one or more of these disorders. Difficulties may be
more prominent according to the social, academic or occupational demands and/or
their life course at the time. For example, an individual may have generalised anxiety problems and social phobia depending on the presenting situation, and in times
of great stress they may additionally experience symptoms of panic.
A generally anxious disposition about everything and everyone they encounter may
become more specifically focused as social anxiety for people with ADHD. Feeling
different from their peers leads some individuals to compare themselves regularly
and unfavourably to others, resulting in their selectively attending to their own

152 ADHD IN ADULTS
perceived negative features and the positive characteristics of others. Some people
may frequently require reassurance in social situations, for example ‘Did I come
across ok? I wasn’t tactless, was I?’. They worry that they are being observed by others in social gatherings and become self-conscious and clumsy. Some people try to
overcompensate by acting the fool and being the ‘life and soul of the party’. In such
cases, a target of anxiety treatments should focus not only on reducing anxious cognitions, feelings and behaviour, but also aim to calm down the individual so that they
do not respond in an overly excited manner, drawing undue attention to themselves
by behaving in a bizarre and/or inappropriate manner (sometimes perceived by others as childish). This is not to dampen down the natural creativity and enthusiasm
of people with ADHD but to encourage the individual to behave with more control
and maturity.
The increased prevalence of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) in individuals with ADHD may be mediated by its links with Tourette’s syndrome (Pauls &
Leckman, 1986), since the rate of ADHD is higher among those with Tourette’s
syndrome and the rate of Tourette’s is elevated among those with ADHD. OCD
symptoms are also likely to worsen attentional difficulties by diverting functional
resources to the obsessive thoughts. However, symptoms that appear to be associated with OCD may be strategies developed by people with ADHD to compensate
for an attention deficit by regularly checking for errors or things they may have
forgotten. Nevertheless, as a person becomes increasingly anxious, this checking
behaviour may become more ritualistic and obsessive. Clients may be embarrassed
by their private obsessions and/or compulsions and this may cause them to avoid
mentioning them to clinicians particularly during their assessment. They may
hope that by having their ADHD treated, their OCD symptoms may also disappear. Over-focusing in an obsessive or perseverative fashion can lead to failure to
complete tasks, due to concentrating on a minor aspect of a task to excess. Some
individuals with these difficulties may prefer not to do a task at all, rather than
risk doing it incorrectly. Exploration and challenging thoughts are useful treatment
strategies, in addition to systematic desensitisation to reduce ritualistic checking
behaviours.
Due to the overlap between ADHD symptoms and anxiety symptoms, it is important
to conduct a thorough and comprehensive assessment of the anxiety-related presenting problem, and ascertain the relationship between the thoughts, beliefs, feelings
and behaviours of the individual about their ability to complete a task or perform
competently in a situation. As in the usual cognitive behavioural treatment of anxiety, it is important to provide a psychoeducational component, outlining the anxiety
model and the relationship between cognitions and behaviour.

ASSESSMENT
The Companion Website provides a questionnaire, the Anxiety Checklist, that
will help the therapist determine and classify the type of anxiety-related problems

153

Very often

Always

Often

Sometimes

In the past week, rate how often you have experienced
the following symptoms

Occasionally

Anxiety checklist

Never

Table 9.1

ANXIETY

Generalised anxiety
I have worried about money, e.g. being able to pay bills,
debts
I have worried about not coping at work/school
I have worried about my health
I have worried that things will go wrong in the future,
anticipating disappointment/failure
I have worried that I am not capable of being a good
parent, employee, son/daughter
Social anxiety
I felt self-consciousness
I avoided social events, e.g. parties
I avoided crowds
I was concerned about performance
I was worried about meeting new people













Panic
I felt constriction in my chest
I felt heart palpitations
I thought I was having a heart attack
I felt dizzy and faint
I felt the blood rushing around my head







Obsessive-compulsive disorder
I felt uncomfortable if the house was not clean and tidy
I needed to check everything several times before I was
confident that it was right
I had to do things in routines otherwise I worried
I had intrusive thoughts
I tended to over-focus







experienced by the client in the past week. The Anxiety Checklist is presented in
Table 9.1 and is designed around themes that are regularly discussed by our clients
at the clinic as sources of anxiety (e.g. generalised anxiety, social anxiety, panic,
obsessive-compulsive problems), in order to help the client and therapist to identify
the subtype of the comorbid presenting problem of anxiety. Table 9.1 gives an example of a completed Anxiety Checklist for a client with generalised anxiety, who
had experienced an acute panic attack relating to feeling overwhelmed by pressure

154 ADHD IN ADULTS
to meet a deadline at work. Thus, the Anxiety Checklist provides a helpful guide
for identifying whether anxiety problems are general or more specified, and forms a
basis for discussion and exploration, in order that the therapist may take an adaptive
approach to treatment and conceptually plan and frame treatment, although it should
be borne in mind that categories of anxiety are not mutually exclusive.
The Anxiety Checklist provided on the Companion Website deliberately excludes
the names of categories (i.e. generalised anxiety disorder; social anxiety; panic disorder; obsessive-compulsive disorder) in order that the client’s responses are not biased. These categories are included in Table 9.1 for illustrative purposes only.

TREATMENT
There are two primary differences when treating adults with ADHD and comorbid
anxiety compared with treating adults without ADHD who have anxiety:
1. It is important to acknowledge the overlap in anxiety and ADHD symptoms and
attempt to disentangle symptoms that are better addressed by the techniques
discussed in the sessions to improve attention and reduce impulsivity (e.g. in
Chapters 4 and 7).
2. Since ADHD adults have difficulty in delaying gratification, it is important
to introduce an immediate reward system to positively reinforce success and
achievement on a much more frequent basis than that usually applied.
The CBT model of treatment proposed is adapted from four fundamental stages to
the treatment process: psychoeducation about the anxiety model from a cognitivebehavioural perspective; learning to cope with negative thoughts; the development
of self-control; and changing behaviour.

Psychoeducation
Psychoeducation is an important part of the treatment process. It is important to explain
to the client what happens to them when they become anxious or worried and apply
this to the anxiety-provoking experiences of the client. This includes teaching the client
how their anxiety impacts on their thoughts, feelings and behaviour, and explaining that
there is an interrelationship between these factors. To a certain extent, this also means
normalising anxiety as a functional process. Everybody becomes anxious or worried at
some point in their lives. It is a normal and healthy reaction. Anxiety or worry usually
arises during times of stress or danger. It allows preparation for fight or flight, in other
words whether to stand one’s ground or whether to run away. People understand that
if they were to be put into a cage with tigers then they would feel anxious. Their anxiety would cause them to have a sharpened awareness of pending danger, and prepare
to protect themselves. Anxiety causes the body’s systems to speed up, which affects
emotions, thoughts, feelings and behaviour. Anxiety is dysfunctional if this process is

ANXIETY 155

activated when the person is not in the tigers’ cage, but when they are going to miss a
deadline, because they have not finished a task or because they have to go to their sister’s birthday party. This explanation will usually make perfect sense to the client.
The Companion Website contains an Anxiety Chart called ‘What happens to you
when you become anxious?’. This introduces the client to the core components that
develop and maintain anxiety – thoughts, feelings, physical reactions and behaviour.
Encouraging the client to complete the chart by separating out these factors will be
helpful when the model of anxiety is introduced as the client will be able to theoretically relate the model to their own experience. An example of a completed Anxiety
Chart for a person with anxiety about completing a project on time for work is presented in Table 9.2. A blank copy is provided on the Companion Website.
Explaining the cognitive-behavioural model of anxiety, that is, the interrelationship
between thoughts, feelings and behaviour in the development and maintenance of
anxiety, usually makes complete sense to the client on an intellectual level. For example, explaining that feeling anxious about a missing pending deadline set by their
manager at work may influence thoughts (e.g. by thinking ‘I’m useless, I never get it
right. I won’t get promoted’), which may lead to physical reactions of nervousness

Table 9.2

Anxiety chart: What happens to you when you become anxious?

Thoughts

Feelings

• I can’t focus
• I feel frightened
• I’m going to lose concentration • I feel panicky
• There must be something
• I feel like I’ve lost control
seriously wrong with me if I
• I feel that ‘ fear is going to take
can’t do this
over’
• Everyone else will criticise me • I feel on edge and irritable
• I’m going mad
• I feel uncomfortable
• I can’t manage this
• I’m useless
Physical reactions

Behaviour

• Increased fidgeting
• Sweaty palms
• Increased heart rate
• Going pale as blood rushes
to ma jor organs
• Stammering
• Restless pacing
• ‘Butterflies’ in stomach

• Not wanting to go out
• Avoiding social situations
• Making excuses not to do things
• Using tobacco, alcohol, drugs,
comfort foods, etc. to calm nerves
• Only going out when someone else is
there
• Overcompensating by being outgoing
and/or overwhelming
• Playing the fool or behaving in a
reckless manner

156 ADHD IN ADULTS
(e.g. nausea and dry mouth and feelings of irritability and rising panic). This in turn
influences behaviour (e.g. give up trying, making excuses, avoiding the situation and
stay at home).
Apart from learning about the interrelationships between thoughts, feelings and
behaviour, the client must also understand how these factors are dynamic and how
they work together to cause deterioration in functioning. This becomes a cycle or a
downward negative spiral of increasing anxiety, with thoughts, feelings and behaviours fuelling each other as they become more severe. Figure 9.1 gives a visual representation of the ‘anxiety spiral’ and this is also included on the Companion Website
in handout format. Figure 9.2 shows a completed ‘thought bubble anxiety spiral’,
and a blank version of this is on the Companion Website, which may be completed
in sessions with the client.
Anxiety can be described as a three-legged table (see Figure 9.3). If one of the legs is
knocked out, then the anxiety table will be unstable, fall over and be eliminated. Anxiety exacerbates cognitive deficits and if the client can learn to reduce their anxiety then
they are more likely to cope in settings and situations perceived as anxiety-provoking.
The ‘legs’ of the table are thoughts, feelings and behaviour, and these will be discussed
in the following sections. The client should be advised that you are going to teach them
ways to knock out each of these legs; that is, by using a ‘three-pronged attack’.

Coping with Negative Thoughts
Anxiety is associated with unpleasant negative thoughts. These are automatic and
flash through the mind in situations that provoke anxiety. For example, if an individual worries about what other people think of them, then they may feel anxious
when they are talking to people they wish to impress but do not know very well. This
may mean that the individual will alter their behaviour in order to reduce feelings of
anxiety, such as by not contributing to the conversation in order to avoid being evaluated by others. Common thoughts expressed by our clients include:

• thinking there must be something seriously wrong with them
• thinking that they are being foolish
• thinking that they are being criticised by others
• thinking that they are not mentally well
• thinking badly about themselves
• putting themselves down
• thinking that they are a failure
Clients need to learn how what they think and believe affects their feelings and
behaviour. For example, if a person wakes up hearing a crash in the middle of the
night and believes this is a burglar, they may feel frightened and call the police.
If they believe it is because they have left a window open and the wind has blown

Figure 9.1 Anxiety spiral

START
I’ve got to
get out of
here
SITUATION
‘Here I am in a situation where
I usually get worried and upset,
(e.g. job interview, presentation
to colleagues, socialising at a
party).’

BEHAVIOUR
PANIC, RUN, ESCAPE,
HELP!

First symptoms of anxiety
begin, e.g. stomach churns, dry
mouth

PANIC
ATTACK!

THOUGHTS
‘It’s just as I thought. I’m starting
to get anxious. I won’t be able to
do this properly.
People will
think I’m stupid.’

FEELINGS/PHYSICAL
SYMPTOMS
‘Oh, dear, I feel really terrible
now. I feel ill, I’m going to
faint, be sick, have a heart
attack. This will cause a scene.’

More symptoms of
anxiety, e.g. palms
clammy, heart racing

THOUGHTS
‘I can’t cope when I get
anxious. I don’t know
what to say. I always do
the wrong thing.’

Figure 9.2 Thought bubble anxiety spiral

ANXIETY

THOUGHTS

FEELINGS

Figure 9.3 The three-legged anxiety table

BEHAVIOUR

ANXIETY 159

something over which has created the crash, they may feel less frightened, go and
pick up the object and go back to sleep. Thus, different thoughts in the same situation
lead one to experience different feelings and to carry out different behaviours.
Negative, anxiety-provoking thoughts are difficult to identify for a number of reasons. They are habitual and flash through everyone’s minds without us even realising.
They are automatic and occur without effort, and some thoughts further perpetuate
anxiety, for example:

• ‘I’m going to make a fool of myself’ (anticipation)
• ‘I can’t cope with this anymore’ (‘I-can’t-stand-it-itis’)
• ‘I can’t breathe, I’m choking’ (misinterpretation of body reactions)
• ‘I’ve got to get out of here’ (thoughts of escape).
A common technique that has been shown to be useful to help clients identify negative thoughts is keeping a ‘thought diary’. This is a record of the situation they were
in, what was going through their mind at the time and how they were feeling. These
feelings can then be rated for how much they believe in them. An example is provided in Table 9.3 for an individual who was having difficulties at work, who is feeling under pressure from their employer to meet a deadline and also having social
anxiety regarding socialising with colleagues. A blank version is provided on the
Companion Website.
Once the individual has learned to apply cognitive techniques to challenge negative
thoughts, the diary can also be used to record the challenges and then re-rate how
much they believe in them. Using this method, the client will be able to evaluate the
success of their cognitive challenges demonstrated by a weakening in their belief
system. Table 9.4 provides an example of negative challenges and a blank version is
provided on the Companion Website.
Table 9.3

Example of a thought diary

Time
and date

Situation

Mon 4th
8.15 am

Getting ready Feeling jittery
for work
and a bit sick

I will never survive
this week

40%

Mon 4th
10.15 am

Boss asks to
see me in his Terrified
office

I’m going to be
fired

50%

Tues 5th
6.15 pm

Going to
pub with
colleagues

Feeling out of
place

I’ve got nothing
to say

70%

Wed 6th
12.00 pm

Deadline is
end of day

Complete panic

I can’t do this.
It’s all over

50%

Feelings

Thoughts

How much do
I believe this?

Table 9.4 Example of negative challenges in a thought diary

Time and date

How much
do I believe
this?

How much do
I believe the
thought now?

Situation

Feelings

Thoughts

th

Mon 4
8.15 am

Getting ready for
work

Feeling jittery
and a bit sick

I will never
survive this
week.

40%

I felt like this last
Monday and got through
the week

20%

Mon 4th
10.15 am

Boss asks to see
me in his office

Terrified

I’m going to
be fired

50%

I don’t know for sure I’ll
be fired. I was called
in last Friday when the
boss told me that my
last project was now
implemented and working
very well

20%

Tues 5th
6.15 pm

Going to pub with
colleagues

Feeling out of I’ve got
place
nothing to
say

70%

Of course I have something
to say. I’m not mute … all I
have to do is ask people
about themselves. I’ll ask
what they are doing at
the weekend

40%

Wed 6th
12.00 pm

Deadline is end of
day

Complete panic I can’t do
this. It’s all
over

50%

I can do this. I am
catastrophising. I must
relax and calm down.
I have worked under
pressure before

30%

Cognitive Challenge

ANXIETY 161
ANXIETY
Challenge
thoughts
Superimpose
thoughts

Distract
thoughts

THOUGHTS

BEHAVIOUR
FEELINGS

Figure 9.4 The three-legged anxiety table – coping with negative thoughts

Figure 9.4 shows the three techniques that can be used to cope with negative thoughts:
(1) challenge negative thoughts – Tuesday 5th; (2) superimpose negative thoughts
with more positive thoughts – Monday 4th; and (3) distraction from thinking negative thoughts – Wednesday 6th. In practice, the techniques applied by the client will
depend much on the context and their personal preference. Figure 9.4 is included on
the Companion Website in handout format.
In sessions, the therapist will need to teach the techniques, rehearse them with the
client and determine what works best and when. For example, ruminative thoughts
about future performance may be best dealt with by cognitive challenges; superimposing negative thoughts with positive thoughts may be helpful to motivate the
client to finish a task; distracting themselves from negative cognitions may be more
helpful when coping with social anxiety. Thus, experiencing anxiety is a process and
techniques will vary in efficacy depending on at what point they are applied in the
process. Table 9.5 outlines some suggestions for techniques that are appropriate for
the different stages of anxiety.

Table 9.5 Cognitive techniques and the process of anxiety
Onset of anxiety

Identify negative automatic thoughts
Cognitive challenges
Identify thinking errors

Midst of anxiety

Coping self-statements
Self-instructions
Flashcards
Distraction techniques

Decreasing anxiety

Self-praise
Rewards

162 ADHD IN ADULTS
Challenging negative thoughts
Just as thoughts can increase anxiety and low mood, they can also decrease it. Different thoughts in the same situation lead people to experience different feelings and
to carry out different behaviours. This means they can learn to change their behaviour by controlling their thoughts. This is a difficult skill to master. The therapist
should begin by explaining to the client that when they feel anxious or distressed,
then they are particularly vulnerable to ‘thinking errors’. This essentially means that
the client is viewing the world through glasses that distort what they see. Common
thinking errors for people with ADHD are that an individual catastrophises and/or
jumps to conclusions (‘it’s all completely hopeless, it will never work and I’ll be
ruined, no one will ever speak to me again’). Table 9.6 describes some common
thinking errors and these are also provided on the Companion Website in Table
9.6a, together with an exercise in a format that can be given to the client and used
as a basis of discussion. The most likely categories for thinking errors are provided
in Table 9.6, but note that thinking-error categories are not mutually exclusive. Usually, by using these materials and by looking back over the thinking errors they
have recorded in their thought diaries, the client will recognise the thinking errors
common to them.
In order to break the cycle, the client must learn to change old ways of thinking, this
means challenging their thoughts and assumptions. Assumptions are ‘if … then …’
statements such as ‘if I don’t do this report in time for the meeting, then I’m a complete failure’.
One way of encouraging the client to challenge their thinking is to get them to imagine that they are a skilled lawyer who is ‘cross-examining’ a thought. For example,
they could ask themselves the following questions:
1. What evidence do I have for thinking in this way?
2. What is the evidence that I can’t cope? Think of times when I have successfully
coped in the past.
3. Am I overestimating the likelihood of this event happening?
4. What is the worst that could happen?
5. What can I do about it?
These questions are presented in a ‘handout’ format on the Companion Website (see
Table 9.6b), together with the example of cognitive challenges that can be applied to
challenge common negative thoughts shown in Table 9.7.
Fortunately, the ADHD personality seems to be predisposed to engage in a ‘cognitive challenge process’ as ADHD individuals have a tendency to positively reappraise stressful situations (Young, 2005). This means they seek to cognitively reframe situations and are receptive to thinking about their problems in a different
way. This characteristic probably leads people with ADHD to face disappointments
with resilience, and gives them the determination to try again.

ANXIETY 163
Table 9.6

Thinking errors

Thinking errors

Definition

All or nothing

The client sees everything in black and white and cannot
appreciate that there is any middle ground or ‘grey areas’, e.g.
‘I can never concentrate on anything’

Overgeneralising

The client draws a general conclusion on the basis of a single event.
They often assume that something will always happen even when
this has occurred on one occasion, e.g. ‘I will mess it up next time’

Catastrophising

Exaggerating or overestimating the likelihood of events can be
due to catastrophising. The client often thinks that whatever
can go wrong will go wrong, e.g. ‘Because I didn’t pay the gas
bill on time, I’m going to be evicted’

Personalising

The client blames themselves for anything unpleasant. They
believe everything people do or say is a reaction to them. They
assume everything is their fault, e.g. ‘She had left the room
because I upset her’

Negative focus

Positive aspects of a situation are ignored or misinterpreted,
so that the client tends to look on the ‘dark side’ and is
pessimistic, e.g. ‘At my work appraisal, they said I needed to
learn a new skill, so I must be useless at my job’

Jumping to conclusions

The client has an automatic negative interpretation of events, even
in absence of facts. This may mean that they tend to predict the
future or read minds, when there is little evidence to support
these predictions, e.g. ‘I have been too slow, she thinks I
cannot possibly do this’

Shoulds and oughts

The client believes they are failing to meet standards or
expectations, without considering whether they are reasonable
or realistic. They may believe they should always get
everything right, e.g. ‘I ought to always be on time’

Exercise
What are the following thinking errors?
1. ‘I did that badly. What’s the point in doing it again?’
Answer: Negative focus
2. ‘I upset her by blurting out gossip. I’m a terrible person.’
Answer: Overgeneralising
3. ‘I should have finished everything I planned to do.’
Answer: Shoulds and oughts
4. ‘Everything goes wrong.’
Answer: Catastrophising

A second way of inducing clients to challenge thoughts is to teach them to take the
perspective of another person. Social-perspective taking is a very helpful technique,
as often clients expect something of themselves that they would not expect from
others. The therapist should invite the client to imagine that a friend came to them

164 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 9.7

Examples of negative thoughts and challenges

Negative thoughts

Examples of cognitive challenges

I am just not good enough

I am not perfect. Like everybody I am good at some
things and not so good at others

What is the point in trying?

If I don’t try, I won’t know. Trying in itself will
broaden my experience and skill. Nobody is
expecting me to do it perfectly

What if I make a mistake – it
would be awful

Everybody makes mistakes. It is good to make
mistakes because that is the best way to learn

I have nothing to say – I’m boring

I have opinions, thoughts and feelings. I like reading
and going out. Perhaps I need to improve my ability
to express myself. I can practice

Nobody likes me

There are people who like me. I have had better
relationships in the past and will in the future

Everybody else has a better time
than I do – they’re happy

I don’t know this for a fact. Just because they seem
busier doesn’t mean they are more satisfied

It would be best if I stayed away
from people, because I’m no
good at relationships

If I stay away I don’t give myself a chance. I’ll
probably be all right if I can just relax

I might break down emotionally
in front of people and feel
ridiculous

I have good reason to be upset. People are a lot more
understanding than I think. It would not be the end
of the world. What is wrong with showing emotion?

I’m hopeless at everything. I’ll
never sort myself out like this

Just take one step at a time. Totally condemning
myself is nonsense. I’ve overcome more difficult
problems than this

with the same problem, what would they tell them? Would they view it in the same
way, in other words, believing that there are no solutions and they will fail? Techniques that look at alternative interpretations or alternative outcomes may be helpful,
for example replacing thoughts like ‘I can’t cope’ with ‘This is difficult, but I can
manage if I take it a step at a time’.
Superimposing positive thoughts
A problem for people with ADHD is that they often do not have a plethora of
‘successful’ experiences to counterbalance life’s disappointments. The scales seem
tipped against them and every idea they have or every project they start comes to
nothing – usually because they do not stick to it and either become distracted by
something else that takes their interest and so give up when it becomes more difficult, or it takes longer than anticipated to finish. This means that their negative automatic thoughts may have some evidence base, and this possibility makes it a more
difficult task for the individual to challenge these as ‘thinking errors’. One solution

ANXIETY 165

is to superimpose negative thoughts and assumptions with positive cognitions and
beliefs, such as making positive and motivating self-statements.
Identifying and challenging negative thoughts is helpful to reduce the onset and
escalation of anxiety. However, once a person is involved in a full blown anxiety attack, it is not always easy for them to apply cognitive challenges. In such cases, the
client should be encouraged to list the cognitive challenges that have been particularly appropriate and efficacious and put these on small ‘flashcards’ and keep them
in a wallet or purse. Then, if they become very anxious and cannot engage themselves in an alternative thinking process, all they have to remember is to look at the
card, which will jolt them into engaging in the process.
Superimposing positive thoughts rather than challenging negative thoughts may be
a more helpful technique for patients with ADHD because of their resilience and
tendency not to give up. This may be a more ‘natural’ way for them to cope with
negative thoughts, to identify them and immediately superimpose them with a more
positive and motivating thought. For example, if the client thinks ‘I can’t cope with
this situation, I am going to lose control’, they replace the thought with ‘I can cope,
I am in control of this situation’.
‘Coping self-talk’ in the form of making positive self-statements and giving selfinstructions to talk themselves through the anxiety process may be helpful strategies
that are more accessible to the individual at a stage of advanced anxiety. However,
replacing negative thoughts is also a process that takes practice and patience but with
time it becomes easier as it becomes as automatic as ‘old ways’ of thinking.
There are many different positive statements that will help to replace negative
thoughts. Some examples are shown in Table 9.8 (and are also on the Companion
Website in ‘wallet-size’ handout form) and the client should note that some cue them
to apply other techniques that will help ‘knock out’ other legs of the anxiety table.
Distraction from negative thoughts
A further cognitive technique that may be applied once the individual is in the midst
of feeling acutely anxious, is that of cognitive distractions. This involves teaching
the client to distract themselves from thinking negative and damaging thoughts that
Table 9.8

Positive self-statements

Anxiety is not harmful, it is a normal human response
I can cope with these feelings
There is no need to escape or avoid this situation, if I just carry on the anxiety will subside
As I relax the anxiety will begin to ease off
Relax, breathe gently and try to let go of the tension

166 ADHD IN ADULTS
serve to increase anxiety. To work, this must involve a specific and directed active
process, such as making themselves engage in mental arithmetic or counting items,
as opposed to reading a newspaper and relaxing. In the latter case, the client is likely
to find that they have read a whole article but not taken in any of the information.
The active process could be either cognitive or physical. If clients distract themselves from negative thinking by engaging in periods of intense physical activity
(e.g. running, team sports), this is likely to not only reduce the negative thinking but
relieve feelings of agitation and restlessness.

Controlling Feelings of Anxiety
To understand how anxiety affects us, it is necessary to be aware of the physical
sensations it can produce. These include breathlessness, nausea, palpitations, dizziness, sweating and chest pains. Individuals with extreme anxiety may believe, or
have believed in the past, that there is something seriously wrong with their health.
For example, they may have interpreted these physical symptoms or signs as coronary heart failure and believe that they are having a heart attack. Common feelings
expressed by our clients with ADHD include:

• feeling frightened and panicky
• feeling they are losing control
• feeling confused and having difficulty focusing on a task or on thoughts
• ‘flooding’ of thoughts and ideas
• ceaseless mental energy
• feeling irritable and/or aggressive
• feeling on edge and nervous
• feeling unhappy
• feeling over-emotional and labile
Figure 9.5 can be used to discuss common physical expressions of anxiety. A copy
can be found on the Companion Website and it may be helpful for the client to determine the somatic symptoms they have experienced in the past and self-regulate
for these early signs of anxiety. If the client can identify early indicators of anxiety,
they can apply techniques to manage the anxiety at an early stage and increase the
likelihood of them managing it successfully.
Body reactions to anxiety may be understood as a physical health problem and not
recognised to be symptoms of an underlying psychological problem or disorder. In
cases of acute anxiety leading to panic attacks, some clients are even admitted to
hospital Accident and Emergency departments, as they believe they are having a
heart attack. This may especially occur if the clients’ problems are associated with
work, stress and performance anxiety (such as not completing tasks on time and
missing deadlines). Body reactions to anxiety, or somatic symptoms, are relatively
easy to identify and clients should be taught to use somatic indicators to trigger the
use of treatment options outlined in the chapter.

ANXIETY 167

Physiological Changes

Resulting Symptoms

Changes in blood pressure

Faintness and dizziness

Skin-blood diverted
to major organs

Pallor

Lung function increases

Shortness of breath or
choking sensations

Heart rate increases

Palpitations

Sweating increases

Clammy hands or
forehead

Digestive system
slows down

Butterflies in the
stomach and nausea

Hair stands on end

Goose pimples

Involuntary urination
and defecation

Frequent desire to go
to the toilet

Muscles tense ready
for action

Shakiness in limbs

Figure 9.5 Bodily reactions to anxiety

A method of coping with feelings of panic is presented in Table 9.9 and this is also
included on the Companion Website.
A paradoxical treatment technique will help the client learn that they can control
feelings of panic by applying techniques to effectively cope with it. This is achieved
by inducing hyperventilation by asking the client to take rapid and shallow breaths.
After a few minutes the client will go red in the face, feel hot and flushed, their heart

168 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 9.9

Ten rules for coping with panic

1. Feelings of panic are an exaggeration of the body’s normal reaction to stress.
2. They are unpleasant but not harmful or dangerous. Nothing worse will happen.
3. Stop adding to panic with frightening thoughts about what is going to happen.
4. Concentrate on what is really happening in your body, not what you fear might happen.
5. Wait for the fear to pass. Accept it. Do not fight it or run away from it.
6. Notice that once you stop adding to thinking frightening thoughts, the fear starts to
fade by itself.
7. The whole point of practice is to learn how to cope with fear – without avoiding it.
This is an opportunity to make progress.
8. Think about the progress you have made. You are moving towards success.
9. When you feel better, start to plan what to do next.
10. When you are ready, start off slowly in an easy and relaxed way. There is no need for
effort or hurry.

will start to palpitate and they will feel dizzy and sweaty. The client will recognise
these symptoms as those they have experienced when in a state of panic. Once this
has been achieved, it is necessary to reverse the state by asking the client to breath
slowly and deeply, to close their eyes and concentrate on their breathing, and on the
air filling their lungs. The therapist can then introduce calming self-talk by asking
the client to say to themselves coping self-statements identified in earlier sessions;
pointing out that if they can induce this state at will, then they can reduce it. This is
an important lesson in self-control.
It is useful for the client to understand how their body feels when they are relaxed
as this means they will better develop an awareness of signs of tension (i.e. that will
flag up changes in the body and indicate the presence of a problem that they can
treat). When in a relaxed state the body has a slow heart rate, breathing is slow and
regular, and tension in the muscles is reduced. The client should feel calm and their
body should feel ‘quiet’ as if they are gently ticking over rather than feeling revved
up and active.
Controlling ‘feelings’ of anxiety means knocking out a ‘leg’ of the table using
techniques that induce a sense of calm and wellbeing (see Figure 9.6). This can
be achieved by relaxation techniques to reduce muscle tension and create a state of
physical calmness. When clients learn to manage and reduce unpleasant feelings,
they can adapt the method to help them feel more relaxed in anxiety-provoking situations. This means they will feel more in control. However, relaxation techniques
need to be practised until they become an automatic process. In order to do this, the
client needs to rehearse the relaxation techniques morning and evening, preferably
before they go to bed. It will help if they find a quiet space somewhere, perhaps after
a warm bath, to maximise the efficacy of the techniques. Gradually, the techniques
should be introduced in a briefer form at times during the day when the client feels
anxious, if appropriate.

ANXIETY 169
ANXIETY

Breathing
relaxation
Progressive
muscle
relaxation
THOUGHTS

BEHAVIOUR
FEELINGS

Figure 9.6 The three-legged table – controlling feelings of anxiety

There are different types of relaxation exercise, the most helpful for people with
ADHD being breathing exercises and progressive muscle relaxation techniques.
Both should be introduced to the client in sessions and practised at home. Initially,
practice should be set as specific homework tasks but the aim is for clients to make
relaxation a part of their daily routine. Progressive muscle relaxation techniques are
particularly good for ‘preventative’ relaxation, to help the client induce and maintain a relaxed frame of mind. They are also helpfully applied in anxiety provoking
situations, but may be inappropriate in some situations, such as staff meetings, as
colleagues may wonder what they are doing. Breathing exercises can be more subtly
applied in such situations and just as effective. The exercises outlined in this chapter
are also presented on the Companion Website for the client to practise outside of
sessions.
Relaxation strategies: breathing exercises
These are exercises that can help correct breathing. In order to learn the technique,
breathing practice needs to be initially when the client feels reasonably calm and
relaxed. Table 9.10 provides two exercises that can be used in treatment sessions and
a handout of instructions is provided on the Companion Website for the client to use
at home.
The client should be reminded that they are learning a new skill – at first it may feel
strange, or difficult, to breathe like this. It is important to continue on with practising, despite these feelings, as gradually they will notice an improvement.
Relaxation strategies: progressive muscle relaxation
Alternatively, the therapist can teach the client to induce a state of total relaxation
of mind and body by teaching progressive muscle relaxation techniques, breathing

170 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 9.10

Breathing exercises

Exercise 1
1. Begin by lying quietly on your back, rest one hand on your stomach and the other on
your upper chest.
2. Breathe in gently. Tell yourself to breathe IN and OUT, gently and rhythmically,
aiming for 7–8 breaths per minute. Do not hold your breath for too long, just slowly IN
and OUT. Concentrate on the breath filling your lungs and being expelled from them.
3. As you breathe out imagine your body relaxing, deeper and deeper. With each
exhalation, your body is sinking further and further into a state of relaxation.
4. Practice this for 10 minutes everyday and, once it feels easy and natural to breathe like
this, move to Exercise 2.
Exercise 2
1. Repeat the steps from Exercise 1, but this time in a sitting position, progressing to
standing up. For at least 3 weeks, try to be aware of your breathing at different times
during the day, and correct it if necessary.

techniques and mental imagery. Research has shown that, aside from treating anxiety,
progressive muscle relaxation techniques reduce tension, headaches and migraine;
lower blood pressure; relieve chronic pain and/or menstrual symptoms; and improve
sleep (Roth & Fonagy, 1996).
Table 9.11 (also on the Companion Website) outlines the instructions for progressive
muscle relaxation techniques, which require the individual to engage in a set of deep
muscle relaxation procedures, whilst working through the body’s muscle sets. The
exercise can be completed in 10 minutes or extended for much longer.
The client can lie on a bed or sit up in a straight-backed chair. The client may start
with the breathing techniques learned in the exercises in Table 9.10, proceed to
the Progressive Muscle Relaxation procedure, then incorporate mental relaxation
whereby the client is asked to focus mentally on different parts of the body and imagine them ‘unwinding’. They can also use relaxing visual imagery, for example, by
asking them to imagine being in a tranquil place. Clients often imagine being on a
beautiful beach with white sand and palm trees. The client should be cued to see the
colours, hear the wind rustling, and see the sun glinting on the water.
It can be difficult at fi rst for clients to practise the progressive muscle relaxation
technique on their own as they have to learn a sequence and remember what to
do. This means they stop and start as they have to read the instructions, which
interferes with the relaxation process. It is extremely helpful to make up a tape of
the process in the session for the client to keep and use at home. This also means
that it can be adapted to be personally appropriate, for example by introducing
at the end visual imagery that has been previously successfully discussed and
used in sessions.

ANXIETY 171
Table 9.11

Progressive muscle relaxation

For each exercise, tense your muscles for about 5–7 seconds. Relax for about 30 seconds
between each exercise. Practise in a quiet, comfortable environment whilst sitting on a
chair.

1. Make a tight fist with your right hand, then relax.
2. Push your right elbow down into the chair while at the same time pulling your
arm towards your chest. Then relax.
3. Make a fist with your left hand, then relax.
4. Push your left elbow down into the chair while at the same time pulling your
arm towards your chest. Then relax.
5. Arch your eyebrows as high as you can, then relax.
6. Squint your eyes tightly together while wrinkling your nose, then relax it.
7. Clench your teeth together tightly while pulling back the corners of your mouth
in an exaggerated smile. Then relax.
8. With your teeth separated, press your lips together while pressing your tongue
against the roof of your mouth. Then relax.
9. Pull your chin down as if trying to touch it against your chest while at the same
time pulling your head backwards. Then relax.
10. After taking a deep breath, press your shoulder blades together behind you as
if you are trying to touch them together. Then relax.
11. After taking a deep breath, make the muscles of your stomach hard and taut (or
make the muscles of your stomach tense by pulling them in or pushing them
out). Then relax.
12. Press your heels into the ground, then relax.
13. Point your toes towards your head, then relax.
14. Point your feet downwards, while turning your feet inwards and curling your
toes under. Then relax.

Changing Behaviour
The third leg of the table involves treating behavioural avoidance (see Figure 9.7).
Avoidance is probably the greatest and most negative behavioural implication of
anxiety. When we feel anxious we tend to want to avoid what we perceive as psychological threats. Our natural response is to avoid unpleasant situations.
Common feelings expressed by our clients include:

• not wanting to go out
• becoming distracted, losing concentration and going off task
• avoiding social situations
• making excuses not to do things
• not sticking up for themselves when they should

172 ADHD IN ADULTS
ANXIETY

Graded
exposure

THOUGHTS

BEHAVIOUR
FEELINGS

Figure 9.7 The three-legged table – changing behaviour

• calming their nerves by smoking, drinking alcohol, taking drugs, eating
• only going out when they have someone with them
• overexertion, overactive, ‘high’ energy
• preoccupation with thoughts, ideas and worries
On a short-term basis avoidance is useful as it is the quickest way for clients to protect themselves and alleviate their anxiety. Of course this is not functional, however,
as it means that the client learns to cope by avoiding anxiety-provoking situations,
such as going to work, going to parties, finishing important tasks. This adds to the
vicious cycle of negative thoughts (see anxiety spiral in Figure 9.1). Unfortunately,
this becomes habitual and the client engages in a process of avoidance whenever
they face anxiety-provoking situations, for example by thinking: ‘I can’t do this;
the last time I tried I couldn’t do this and I gave up; I gave up and didn’t do it.’
Thus this cognitive and behavioural process is self-reinforcing. Instead of facing
and resolving the problem, the client avoids it and makes the problem more daunting to face the next time. Fear leads to avoidance, which leads to more fear, which
leads to more avoidance, and so on. The more the client avoids a situation the worse
their anxiety becomes. It becomes gradually worse and the anxiety generalises to
other situations and circumstances. In time, avoidance behaviour reduces confidence
and self-esteem. Confidence is developed through achievement and an important
part of managing anxiety is to start facing up to fears and to stop avoiding anxiety-provoking situations. This is a very difficult thing to do, so it is important that
the client (and the therapist) does not expect too much too soon, or that unrealistic
targets are set. The taste of success will involve the therapist structuring a hierarchical schedule of graded exposure to tasks that have become challenging to the client.
Using this approach, the client will learn to plan a gradual way to develop confidence
and reintroduce activities they have avoided and achieve them. Table 9.12 describes
a set of incremental stages for the client to follow to build confidence and achieve
tasks. This is also included on the Companion Website, in a format to hand out to
clients.

ANXIETY 173
Table 9.12

Overcoming avoidance and increasing confidence

1. Make a list of situations you avoid because of your feelings.
2. Grade each situation, using a scale of 0–10 (0 ⫽ no anxiety, 10 ⫽ severe anxiety).
3. List situations in order of difficulty – put the least difficult at the top of the list and the
most difficult at the bottom.
4. Take action – tackle each situation in turn – begin with the least difficult first. Reward
yourself for completing each stage. Succeeding in completing the least difficult task
on the list will make it easier to face our other fears and help prepare us for the most
difficult.
5. Keep a record of what happens and the progress you make, i.e. use a diary.
6. Evaluate how you coped. Congratulate yourself on what you have achieved. Initially,
the most important aspect of success will be just ‘facing’ the situations. Gradually, you
will be able to evaluate how well you are managing your feelings.
7. Reward with small rewards for each step and a greater reward for completion of the
programme.
8. Practise – KEEP PRACTISING – the more you tackle a situation, the better it will
become and the more confident you will grow. By tackling our fears a step at a time,
we can gradually regain confidence and self-esteem.
Remember: do not expect too much too soon and be proud of whatever progress you do
make!

For example, one of our clients, Sarah, was extremely anxious about going to the
local shops as she had previously absent-mindedly walked out of a supermarket
with her basket without paying. The security guards had stopped her and brought
her for questioning, but not pressed charges. Sarah was anxious that people would
recognise her and that they would embarrass her by escorting her off the premises.
The situations she avoided were as shown in Table 9.13. Sarah then rated how difficult she thought each situation would be on a scale from 0–10 (see Table 9.14).
These situations were then rearranged into the order of difficulty as shown in Table
9.15. (Blank versions of Tables 9.13, 9.14 and 9.15 are found on the Companion
Website.)

Table 9.13 Example of stage 1: list of situations avoided
1. Make a list of things you avoid because of your feelings
Entering the supermarket past the security guards
Going around the supermarket with a basket
P aying the cashier
Going to the nearby newsagents
Going to the hairdressers next door
Walking down the road past the supermarket
Going to the chemists

174 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 9.14

Example of stage 2: grading of list of situations avoided (0–10)

2. Grade each situation, using a scale of 0–10 (0 ⫽ no anxiety, 10 ⫽ severe anxiety)
Entering the supermarket past the security guards
(because they may grab me, or I might impulsively draw attention to
myself)

10

Going around the supermarket with a basket
(because they could spot me at any moment)

8

P aying the cashier
(because she may recognise me from before and tell other people in
the queue)

9

Going to the nearby newsagents
(because they may have been told about me, but I know the
shopkeeper from the past)

2

Going to the hairdressers next door
(because staff from the supermarket may look at me through the
window)

6

Walking down the road past the supermarket
(because the security guards may think I’ve stolen something and
follow me)

5

Going to the chemists
(because they may have a ‘wanted’ list of potential shoplifters

3

Sarah and the therapist then planned each step of the hierarchy. They carefully
discussed what could go wrong and how to plan around these difficulties. They
role-played what Sarah might say to the security guards if they did stop her. She
decided that after each stage she would reward herself by having a bar of chocolate from the newsagents, new shampoo from the chemists, a haircut, and a CD
from the supermarket. ADHD clients are particularly motivated to work towards

Table 9.15 Example of stage 3: ranking list of situations avoided (0–10) and
choosing rewards
3. List situations in order of difficulty – put the least difficult at the
top of the list and the most difficult at the bottom
Going to the nearby newsagents
Going to the chemists
Walking down the road past the supermarket
Going to the hairdressers next door
Going around the supermarket with a basket
P aying the cashier
Entering the supermarket past the security guards

Grade

Reward

2
3
5
6
8
9
10

chocolate
shampoo
magazine
haircut
long bath
cake
CD

ANXIETY 175

short-term rewards and, although anxiety reduction in itself can be an internal reward, motivation can be enhanced using external rewards in addition. Sarah found
that she quickly progressed and once she had walked towards the supermarket, her
anxiety was not as severe as she had anticipated.

CONCLUSIONS
Many individuals with ADHD present with some anxiety difficulties, even if they
do not meet full criteria for a formal diagnosis. Anxiety can develop in many
different ways in line with the main categories of disorder including panic disorder,
social anxiety, generalised anxiety and obsessive-compulsive disorder. However,
there may be some overlap in the phenomenology of anxiety symptoms and the core
symptoms of ADHD, including feelings of restlessness and distractibility. It is therefore important to carefully assess for such difficulties and intervene as necessary
using appropriate techniques. A CBT approach has been provided, which begins
with psychoeducation regarding the disorder using the ‘three-legged table analogy’.
In order to tackle anxiety difficulties, the client and therapist can decide to ‘knock
out’ each of the legs (thoughts, feelings, behaviours) in turn. Thoughts are addressed
using challenging strategies and superimposing positive thoughts, or developing
distraction techniques. Feelings of anxiety can be modified using a range of relaxation techniques and avoidance behaviours can benefit from using graded exposure.
Whilst these strategies are well known to therapists who work with individuals with
anxiety disorders, it is recommended that they are adapted in order to accommodate the idiosyncrasies of people with ADHD and the examples through the chapter
illustrate how this may be achieved.

10
