TREATMENT OF ADHD

There is a range of clinical approaches to working with adults with ADHD. This
chapter will briefly review the different therapies recommended to be helpful in
treating ADHD and outline the principles of the Young–Bramham Programme,
which draws on cognitive behavioural, psychoeducational and motivational interviewing therapeutic paradigms.
As in the management of ADHD in childhood, pharmacotherapy has a major role in
treating ADHD, and when taking appropriate medication an individual is better placed
to access psychological treatment as they may be better focused, less distracted and/or
restless. For childhood ADHD, the combination of pharmacological and behavioural
treatments has not been shown to be more efficacious than medication alone (MTA
Cooperative Group, 1999) but this is less likely to be the case in the treatment of
ADHD adolescents and adults (Wilens et al., 1999). Although medication helps
alleviate core symptoms of ADHD, the additional comorbid psychiatric problems,
psychosocial problems and skills deficits which have developed over a lifetime
of having ADHD may be usefully addressed by the psychological interventions
presented in the Young–Bramham Programme.

MEDICATION
Stimulant medication (usually methylphenidate or dexamphetamine) forms the mainstay of treatment across the ADHD lifespan (Spencer et al., 1996). However, efficacy
is heterogeneous, ranging from a 25% success rate to as much as 78% (Spencer et al.,
1995). Thus, some individuals benefit less from medication than others.
Medication can be prepared in immediate release (e.g. Ritalin) and slow release
forms (e.g. Concerta). Immediate release forms act within 20–30 minutes,
peak after approximately 1–2 hours and wear off after 3–4 hours. Some patients
report a ‘rebound’ effect, when they become more irritable and experience more

42 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 3.1
1.
2.

3.

4
5.

6.
7.

Medication tips

Slow release preparations reduce the need for remembering to take medication as
frequently as immediate release preparations
Work out the best time for taking tablets in order to optimise sleep – for some
people, medication helps them sleep; for others, it can keep them awake and
therefore the last dose can be taken mid-afternoon
Reminders for taking medication can be programmed into mobile phones or
watches. Otherwise, cues can be made at other times of day, e.g. when television
programmes or mealtimes begin. It is important to take medication at regular
times
Repeat prescriptions should be organised well in advance of medication running
out. This could be done by planning several appointments ahead with the client
Planned ‘drug holidays’ are sensible from time to time, to establish the extent to
which symptoms are still problematic. However, these should be planned carefully
and not be taken just when medication runs out
Clients should be encouraged not to view medication as a ‘magic pill’ but as one
of several strategies for improving their functioning
Some clients who respond well to medication initially may become depressed
after a period of treatment. This may be because their improved cognitive
function allows them to ruminate, and hence may increase low mood as they
reflect on regrets about their past and present lives. This possibility should be
mentioned when patients begin treatment

pronounced symptoms as their medication wears off. Slow release preparations can
be advantageous as they reduce the need to remember to take medication and have
been reported to have a smoother action, although some patients still experience a
rebound. Medication tips are presented in Table 3.1, which is also on the Companion
Website in a format suitable for use as a handout.
Other non-cerebral stimulant drugs can also be effective although few studies
directly compare their effects with stimulant medication. Anti-depressants, such as
desipramine and venlafaxine, can be effective and, more recently, atomoxetine has
been marketed as an alternative to stimulants. Such preparations may be preferable for patients with comorbid depression and those who have adverse reactions to
stimulants.
Commonly reported side effects include insomnia, nausea, headaches, weight loss
and anxiety. Less common side effects are psychosis and tics. In a very few cases, hair
loss has been reported. Some of the techniques introduced in the Young–Bramham
Programme will help clients in the management of medication side effects (see
Table 3.2). However, any side effect should be discussed with a medical professional
before attempting any of the described techniques.

TREATMENT OF ADHD 43
Table 3.2

Methods to counteract the side effects of medication

Side effect

Recommendations

Insomnia
Nausea
Headaches

See Chapter 12 on sleep hygiene
Tends to remit, take medication with meals
Relaxation techniques (see Chapter 9) and
medication for pain relief
Take medication with food or just after meals
Psychoeducation. See Chapter 9 on anxiety
Stop medication immediately and seek medical
advice
Stop medication and seek medical advice

Weight loss
Anxiety/edginess
Psychotic symptoms, e.g. paranoia,
hallucinations
Tics

THE YOUNG–BRAMHAM PROGRAMME
We have conducted in-depth interviews with our clients to ascertain their beliefs
and feelings about receiving a diagnosis and being treated with medication (Young,
Bramham et al., in submission). From these interviews, three themes have emerged:
1. Review of the past – feeling different from others. Clients reported that they had
always felt different from their peers and family. They had been compared unfavourably with siblings and often told they were stupid, lazy or disruptive. For
some individuals, this led them to internalise the negative feedback, which in
turn had a detrimental impact on their self-esteem. However, other individuals
described being relatively resistant to the criticisms of others. This may in part
have been due to the protective role of their inattention and impulsivity, which
prevented them from ruminating about their difficulties. They described not having the ability to dwell on an issue for long enough for it to become distressing or
problematic. In addition, some individuals described reviewing their own childhood through observing their children with ADHD and reflecting on how the
disorder affected them in their youth.
2. Emotional impact of the diagnosis. On being diagnosed with ADHD, clients
often felt a sense of relief and elation that there was an explanation for their
difficulties. This was quickly succeeded by turmoil and confusion as they tried
to make sense of past experience in light of the diagnosis. They began to consider what might have been, how their lives may have been more successful if
they had been diagnosed with the disorder and received treatment earlier. For
example, they may have been able to achieve academically rather than experiencing concentration problems in the classroom, which meant they were unable
to gain appropriate qualifications commensurate with their potential. There was
also anger that they had not been given appropriate support and advice during
their childhood and adolescence. Clients then felt particularly sad and regretful
that they had come to expect themselves to fail and underachieve. There was a

44 ADHD IN ADULTS
period of adjustment during which they came to realise that they may have a
lifelong chronic disorder and this elicited some anxiety. However, in the final
stages of adjustment, individuals came to accept the diagnosis and the need to
take medication.
3. Consideration of the future. Clients were able to acknowledge how medication
had improved their motivation and ability to function in their everyday lives,
particularly regarding interpersonal relationships. It also allowed them to recognise the difference between their symptoms when they had taken medication
and when it had worn off. However, they were aware that all their difficulties
did not disappear with pharmacological treatment and that certain problems
required them to makes changes in their behaviour. This distinction was important for clients in understanding the features of their own presentation. Some
individuals were worried that others would believe they were using ADHD as
an excuse for all their difficulties and hence it was useful for them to understand
what was and was not attributable to the disorder. There were also concerns
about the stigma attached to ADHD and this influenced their disclosure of the
diagnosis.
These findings identify a role for psychological treatment in three areas. First, it is
necessary to help clients through the process of adjustment and make sense of the
past. Second, in order to reduce anxiety about the future therapists should emphasise the clients’ strengths and positive characteristics that will allow them to make
changes in the future. Finally, there is a need for skills development, particularly in
domains that do not improve directly with medication, in order to allow individuals
to function more successfully.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE YOUNG–BRAMHAM
PROGRAMME
This Young–Bramham Programme promotes two primary aims of psychological
treatment:
1. Change from the outside in: whereby it is aimed to provide clinicians with ways
to encourage and help the individual to change the environment in order to optimise their personal, occupational and social functioning.
2. Change from the inside out: whereby it is aimed to provide clinicians with ways
of encouraging the individual to develop psychological strategies for adaptive
functioning within different environments. This is achieved by amalgamating
aspects of independent evidence-based psychological treatments, drawing on a
cognitive behavioural, motivational and psychoeducational paradigm and applying techniques to meet the needs of adults with ADHD.
However, the neuropsychological presentation of patients with ADHD is not unique
to this disorder. Indeed deficits of attentional control underlie many psychological

TREATMENT OF ADHD 45

conditions and certain modules of the Young–Bramham Programme may be helpful
more generally for individuals with cognitive deficits of this type (e.g. those suffering with traumatic brain injury, schizophrenia, mild learning disabilities, etc.).
The objectives of the Young–Bramham Programme are:
1. To provide information about ADHD.
2. To provide psychological strategies for coping with symptoms and associated
problems.
If the delivery of the programme is in a group format, then a third objective is:
3. For ADHD adults to meet others with similar difficulties and experiences.
The Young–Bramham Programme draws on three core psychological techniques,
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy, Psychoeducation and Motivational Interviewing.
It is intended to enable the individual to develop self-efficacy and the confidence
that change can be achieved, to develop strategies to effect positive lifestyle change
and cope with challenges. This involves education about the disorder, adopting
psychoeducational techniques, overcoming ambivalence drawing on motivational
interviewing decisional balance, cognitive-restructuring and reframing the past
by challenging negative automatic thoughts, self-monitoring performance, recognising errors in thinking and evaluating cognitive distortions and misattributions.
Whenever possible, it will also be important to elicit core beliefs that the individual
holds about themselves, other people and the world. Behavioural techniques such
as graded task assignments, modelling and role-play are employed to develop and
rehearse new skills.
We introduce how to adapt these core techniques for people who have cognitive
deficits of impulsivity and inattention, for example by applying a variety of
techniques in sessions (shifting topics, visual aids, role-play, etc.) and introducing
frequent breaks. In particular, individuals with ADHD are motivated to satisfy a
need for immediate gratification, and treatment needs to be structured to include
regular immediate and delayed reward systems. Specific tools such as worksheets,
role-plays and exercises are presented as ways of maintaining attention and
motivation, and reducing impulsivity. A fast-paced structure incorporating a variety
of cognitive behavioural techniques (including practical exercises) will be attractive
to individuals who have significant cognitive deficits, high intolerance and a low
boredom threshold.

THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE AND ENGAGEMENT IN TREATMENT
A central tenet of the therapeutic programme is collaboration. It is vital to engage
and motivate an individual by setting agendas and goals of therapy together. This

46 ADHD IN ADULTS
approach is likely to have face validity for individuals who may feel ambiguity
over engaging with a clinician. It is important that the client has confidence in the
therapist and perceives that the therapist understands their problems and the prognosis of ADHD in adulthood.
By adulthood, individuals with ADHD have frequently had many encounters with
various education and mental health services (Young, Toone & Tyson, 2003).
However, the diagnosis of ADHD has often not been made or the individual may
have been given contradictory information. Individuals diagnosed for the first time
in adulthood may lack trust in services and feel they have been unfairly treated by a
system that has failed to identify their problems. Also, clients with ADHD may have
more difficulty in coping with waiting for an appointment and become frustrated by
any delay before assessment. Once diagnosed, they may feel angry and bitter that
their condition had not been recognised sooner. It is important that they develop
confidence in what they may perceive as yet another clinician before them. A collaborative and supportive relationship is crucial for the success of therapy for those
adults who may have had difficulties in forming long-term healthy relationships and
have experienced rejection. Previous relationships may have been intense but only
lasted for a short period.
Nadeau (1995) identifies several roles that the therapist should adopt when treating
an individual with ADHD:
1. Supporter: this involves supporting the client to convert from being a victim to
being empowered.
2. Interpreter: here the therapist should facilitate interpretation of the constellation
of difficulties making up the individual’s ADHD. This information can be communicated to others who are in contact with the client to help them to understand
the disorder.
3. Structurer: in order to provide a foundation for someone who has difficulty in
planning and organising, the clinician should become more active and structured.
4. Educator: education may be provided through reading, writing session notes
collaboratively, or ongoing (verbally) as part of the therapeutic process.
We propose a fifth additional role, and perhaps a more primary role:
5. Trainer: the predominant function of the therapist is, through guided discovery,
to help the individual build a bridge between their internal and external world.
The individual needs to identify and develop appropriate coping strategies to
overcome difficult situations and obstacles to progress.
Developing a successful therapeutic relationship is crucial regardless of the mode of
treatment. This is essential in the early stages of therapy, particularly if this is at a
time when the client adjusts to their diagnosis.

TREATMENT OF ADHD 47

THE IMPACT OF THE DIAGNOSIS
Treatment for adults begins at the time they are diagnosed. Following diagnosis, we found that an adult passes through six stages: (1) initial relief and elation;
(2) confusion and emotional turmoil; (3) anger; (4) sadness and grief; (5) anxiety;
and finally (6) accommodation and acceptance (Young, Bramham, Gray & Rose, in
submission). Thus the way that the diagnosis is communicated to the client is crucial
in their understanding of the disorder and their future adjustment to the diagnosis.
Our research has supported this proposal as we found that many individuals do not
absorb much information when being given positive results regarding the diagnosis.
It is not until a second appointment that clients are able to process the experience of
having a diagnosis of ADHD, take in relevant information and ask questions. Thus
factual information regarding diagnosis and treatment should be presented in written
format and reinforced at a subsequent appointment.
Many people feel relieved after they have received a diagnosis of ADHD. They say
they always knew there was something wrong and it is reassuring to know that it
is not their fault. Although people have often thought about ADHD for some time
before receiving the diagnosis, hearing the words ‘you have ADHD’ can still be
a shock requiring emotional adjustment. Many people report that, following diagnosis, they experience an emotional reaction, such as feelings of regret, guilt and
sadness, which are natural and part of an acceptance process. They then attempt to
reframe past events – what can be attributed to ADHD and what cannot? How could
things have been different? Following treatment with medication they report a sense
of change in identity saying they see themselves as becoming more serious and less
‘zany’.
It is therefore important to encourage clients to talk to those who know them well
and to reassure themselves that they are still the same person as before. Furthermore,
helping clients to become more informed about their condition will allow them to
understand themselves better and optimise their abilities. Reviewing helpful coping strategies will reassure them. Undoubtedly they will have already developed
numerous ways of helping themselves without therapeutic input and this should be
explored as it will give clues to what will be helpful to adopt in treatment and what
will not.

PSYCHOEDUCATION
Psychoeducation should be applied from the start of the diagnostic process (Jackson &
Farrugia, 1997). The aim is to promote knowledge about the disorder, the meaning
of the diagnosis, and the impact it has had on the individual (Weiss et al., 1999).
The first part of the education process is to provide fundamental information about
ADHD, as there is still a surprising amount of erroneous ‘lay’ information that is
misleading and confusing to the client. Murphy (1998) suggests that the therapist

48 ADHD IN ADULTS
should explain the reason why the individual fulfils the criteria for a diagnosis of
ADHD to enhance their understanding of the disorder. Education about treatment
methods is important at this stage as many individuals may have preconceptions
about the impact of stimulant treatment and the utility of psychological approaches.
A written handout is helpful.
Following sessions promoting psychoeducation, we have found that there is a greater
shift to a biological definition and understanding of the disorder. For example, a
client who previously thought ADHD was a ‘personality disorder that affects your
attention span and thought processes’, after psychoeducation described it as a ‘condition which affects brain chemistry, and contact mechanisms in the brain’. Additionally, following psychoeducation sessions, individuals recognised how emotional and
self-esteem problems are also related to the primary disorder, whereas previously
they thought that the disorder was restricted to the core symptoms of inattention,
hyperactivity and impulsivity.
We have examined how individuals tend to view treatment for ADHD and found
that individuals strongly focus on medication as being the sole treatment available. For example, when asked how ADHD can be overcome, responses included:
‘drugs’, ‘medication’ and ‘death’. However, after psychoeducation sessions, individuals tended to encompass a greater range of possibilities and recognise a biosocial
model, for example ‘medication, psychological strategies, environmental changes to
your home/work so it no longer affects your life’.
Through a psychoeducation treatment model, the therapist should inform the
individual about the aetiology of ADHD, its prognosis, comorbid problems,
cognitive deficits and their expression in daily living. Associated factors of the
ADHD syndrome should also be explained, such as skills deficits and the likelihood
of maladaptive coping strategies. However, this should be put constructively with
emphasis on targets for treatment.
Understanding that their problems stem from an underlying neurodevelopmental basis will be an important step in repairing the self-esteem of people who have long
believed themselves to be stupid and/or who have been labelled as stupid or lazy
by others. Furthermore, by acknowledging and understanding their limitations,
individuals can develop realistic expectations for performance. This will be especially important when applied to psychological therapy, for example, the rehearsal
of new skills requires repetition and patience. These are unlikely characteristics of
adults who tend to seek novelty and stimulation. Acknowledging that sometimes
the Young–Bramham Programme will be challenging and providing information
about the disorder can help individuals appreciate that learning new strategies
requires ongoing practice until a new skill becomes automatic and routine. Working collaboratively, individuals must be motivated to complete the Young–Bramham
Programme and not give up half way through.

TREATMENT OF ADHD 49

MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Motivational interviewing techniques, based on Prochaska and DiClemente’s (1982)
model, are helpful as they draw on a theoretical background where change is regarded
as a cycle of stages (see Figure 3.1). The transactional model of change is a paradigm
that views change as a dynamic process with the early stages requiring a greater
supportive role by others (e.g. therapist, family) and in later stages the individual
becomes self-reinforcing and autonomous. Individuals with ADHD may lack confidence in the ability to effect change. So ambivalence and resistance to change can be
overcome by introducing motivational interviewing techniques into treatment.
Motivational interviewing is client-centred and therefore focuses on the client’s
current concerns and perspectives. It is directive, aiming to resolve ambivalence
through reinforcement of talk which involves changes and thus diminishing resistance. Rather than imparting a set of techniques, motivational interviewing is a means
of communication that facilitates change. Miller and Rollnick (2002) state there are
four general principles of motivational interviewing:
1. Expressing empathy; that is, using reflective listening techniques to understand
the patient’s feelings and accepting them, whilst acknowledging that ambivalence
is normal. This will be particularly important when treating adults with ADHD,
as they may have found themselves rebuffed or ridiculed by others when expressing any interest in trying to make changes in their lives.
2. Developing discrepancy; that is, motivating change by highlighting a discrepancy between their current behaviour and important goals or values. For example,
helping a client recognise that their disorganisation means they have occupational
problems, e.g. they may be unable to gain or sustain a job, which in turn affects
their perception of self-worth.
3. Rolling with resistance; that is, not arguing with the client for change and using
resistance as a signal to respond differently, but inviting new perspectives without
Precontemplation
The client is not considering change
Contemplation
Change is seriously evaluated
Preparation
Planning and committing to change
Action
Making specific behavioural change
Maintenance
Working to sustain change

Figure 3.1 Stages of change

50 ADHD IN ADULTS
imposing them. This is particularly appropriate when working with clients who
become defensive and confrontational, as it is less challenging for them to take
the perspective of an ‘onlooker’.
4. Supporting self-efficacy; that is, by imparting the idea that the therapist can facilitate change but cannot change the client. The aim is to promote a client’s
belief in the possibility for change and enhancing the client’s confidence in their
capability of coping with obstacles and succeeding.

COGNITIVE BEHAVIOURAL THERAPY (CBT)
Adults with ADHD present with multiple problems and complex histories. Their
strengths may be buried under a mountain of negative thoughts and experiences.
Thus it is important to identify goals of treatment. These may be:

• general: e.g. motivation to engage in treatment
• modular: e.g. to reduce social anxiety
• specific: e.g. to complete homework tasks.
Individuals with ADHD require structure in terms of personal organisation, social
boundaries and practical help to cope with everyday problems. They achieve best in
an environment where there are clear rules and expectations of behaviour. Therefore,
a cognitive-behavioural approach is effective for adults with ADHD, whether applied
on an individual or group basis, because it is structured and has a strong evidence
base for mood-related disorders. Cognitive behaviour therapy has been successfully
applied to this client group even with minimal contact (Stevenson et al., 2002; Wilens
et al., 1999). CBT emphasises action as a means of addressing change, thus individuals who adopt a role of a ‘passive recipient’ are unlikely to be successful and require
more intensive motivational interviewing treatment as outlined above.
There are a number of challenges in the adaptation of CBT for this client group.
These vary from pragmatic difficulties, for example resistance to completing ‘homework’ tasks, to generic problems, such as core symptoms. In the following chapters,
specific modules of the Young–Bramham Programme are presented, outlining CBT
techniques, which are helpful for treating adults with ADHD. More generally, the
cognitive behavioural treatment aims to provide cognitive remediation, cognitive
reframing of the past, cognitive restructuring and cognitive reasoning strategies,
rationalisation, development of internal/external compensatory strategies as well as
drawing on behavioural techniques.

Cognitive Remediation Strategies
Cognitive remediation strategies are an important method for the treatment of core
symptoms of adult ADHD as they may be used to enhance memory, attention and

TREATMENT OF ADHD 51

organisation in everyday life. Weinstein (1994) suggests that they are an important active adjunct to other psychological treatment interventions. Learning to apply strategies
that directly address and/or compensate for the core symptoms may help individuals
to feel they have greater self-control and to reduce feelings of learned helplessness.
The neuropsychological assessment of clients is useful for establishing a profile of
cognitive strengths and weaknesses. For example, individuals who have deficits in
selective attention will benefit from learning attentional and memory enhancing
strategies. Learning to ignore external distractors and develop techniques to stay on
task will be important for individuals who have difficulty sustaining attention. Others may have difficulty with impulse control and require input in this area.

Cognitive Reframing of the Past
Adults with ADHD will have experienced a history of failure in many aspects of
their life. Often they will have been given the message that they are stupid, lazy and
unmotivated. The cumulative effect of this is often low self-esteem and a belief that the
situation can never be changed (Murphy, 1998). Helping the individual to understand
that ADHD has a neurological basis and is ‘not a character defect or moral weakness’
should begin to provide the person with some hope for the future (Murphy, 1995).
Once individuals are diagnosed with ADHD for the first time in adulthood they may
go through an adjustment period coming to terms with the diagnosis and the impact
of the disorder on their lives. They may reflect on past experiences and ruminate on
these from a different perspective. Some individuals may feel relief that there is an
explanation for the ways events have unfolded but others may feel resentment and/or
regret that their situation could have been different. There is a risk that individuals may become depressed if they ruminate over past underachievements and lost
opportunities. The therapist should acknowledge feelings of distress and confusion
and normalise these thoughts and feelings. The therapist should then seek to elicit
examples of positive aspects of having the disorder and direct the individual to learn
from the past and focus on the future in a constructive manner.

Cognitive Restructuring and Reasoning Strategies
Some people with ADHD are creative and have no difficulty applying helpful CBT
strategies, such as thought monitoring, challenging negative thoughts and assumptions,
and generating alternative cognitions. Others have specific difficulties in abstract
reasoning. In the latter case, clients will require greater support and practice to master techniques. In particular, impulsivity may impede the development of reasoning
strategies as clients do not think through a course of action or sequentially develop
an idea, for example causing them difficulty applying social perspective-taking
techniques and/or interpersonal problem solving. These issues are addressed in
Chapter 8.

52 ADHD IN ADULTS

Rationalisation
Adults with ADHD may become over-focused on current thoughts, and hence their
preoccupation may mean they have difficulty distancing themselves from distorted
cognitions in order to challenge and replace them. This may be the case especially
soon after treatment with stimulant medication, when individuals (who are less
likely to be distracted) may become preoccupied with negative beliefs whilst reframing the past. It is important that clients are coached using a ‘guided discovery’
framework to encourage them to reason critically, engage in consequential thinking
and rationalise beliefs.

Development of Internal/External Compensatory Strategies
Given that adults with ADHD will have experienced ADHD symptoms throughout
their life, it is likely that they will have already developed an extensive repertoire of
compensatory strategies, both adaptive and maladaptive. Compensatory strategies
can be divided into those which:

• Require change from within (i.e. internal strategies such as ‘stop and think’
techniques).
• Involve the adaptation of the environment to suit the individual (i.e. external strategies such as removing potential distractions).

Many problems can be alleviated with a combination of both compensatory
approaches. Presenting strategies in this two-pronged format will empower the
individual to address future problems by looking for ways of changing themselves
and ways of changing aspects of their environment. It is important to emphasise
these two methods throughout the Young–Bramham Programme as adopting a dual
approach will optimise its success.

Behavioural Techniques
When treating clients with learning disabilities and ADHD, the clinician will need to
draw more heavily on behavioural techniques. Whilst much of the Young–Bramham
Programme draws on cognitive techniques, changing behaviour requires the rehearsal of new actions that are modified, applying positive and negative reinforcement and punishment techniques. The individual will be required to observe and
record identified behaviours, and monitor change in homework tasks. However, some
adults with ADHD may have difficulty organising themselves to follow a Behavioural
Programme and make observations about themselves. Similarly, some adults with
ADHD may find difficulty applying a reward system appropriately. Impulsivity could
mean that they reach for the reward even if they are not entitled to it or may become
easily frustrated if they feel that they are being deprived of something. It will be important for the therapist to be aware that difficulties may arise in the maintenance of

TREATMENT OF ADHD 53

a Behavioural Programme and to watch out for intermittent reinforcement of maladaptive behaviours. Weiss et al. (1999) suggest that all of these difficulties need to be
taken into consideration when designing a programme and discussed fully with the
individual concerned. Methods regarding organisation of time and the introduction
of a reward system into a timetable or week schedule are produced in Chapter 5.

STRUCTURE OF THE YOUNG–BRAMHAM PROGRAMME
The role of the therapist in the early stages is to explain and clarify the therapeutic
rules and boundaries. This means asserting that treatment is a collaborative process
and displacing potential power struggles. Many individuals with ADHD have personality problems, for example, they may be pedantic, challenging and confrontational in presentation. A tendency to procrastinate will particularly hamper progress.
Whilst most clients with ADHD will be motivated, interesting and creative, it is important to recognise that others will be therapeutically more demanding.
Concentration problems may mean that individuals have difficulty following a train
of thought or developing a theme using cognitive techniques. They may have difficulty keeping to time limits and/or struggle to cope with the duration of a 50-minute
session. Adaptations to the therapeutic process will need to take account of these
problems by introducing shorter sessions, scheduled breaks, structured changes in
topic and/or variety in treatment methods (e.g. switching between visual aids, written exercises and role-plays within sessions).
Cognitive-behavioural therapy is usually time limited, ranging between 8 and 12
sessions, sometimes more. However, individuals with ADHD may require longer
term treatment in order to address their multiple problems. It is advisable that sessions are held at a specified time and day each week as making different appointment times can increase the likelihood of non-attendance. Nevertheless the therapist
should expect clients to be late for appointments but try not to accommodate this by
extending the session. Instead, techniques should be identified that can prevent this
occurring and set homework tasks to address the problem. Telephoning the client the
day before their session may improve attendance and time keeping, or asking the client to identify a person or method (e.g. telephone alarm) to remind them. Prompting
by the therapist should be faded out during the course of treatment.
As discussed in Chapter 1, the Young–Bramham Programme is modular, so specific
topics can be selected as appropriate. Alternatively the therapist can work through
each module until the Programme is complete (see Chapters 4–14 in Table 1.1).
If modules are to be selected, we recommend these are chosen collaboratively so
that the client is empowered by the process. Due to attentional and working memory
deficits, it is recommended that sessions allow additional time for consolidation of
information and rehearsal of new material. It is recommended that 3–4 sessions are

54 ADHD IN ADULTS
spent on each module, but this may be shortened or lengthened according to need.
However, due to the underlying desire for immediate gratification, we suggest that
no more than six sessions are spent on one module at any time. If the material is not
fully covered or needs to be repeated, we suggest that this is re-introduced at a later
stage and following alternative modules in order to avoid boredom and disengagement. Due to the Young–Bramham Programme’s modular design, skills acquisition
is cumulative. Thus, if client has difficulty with a module presented early in the
programme, this can be revised at a later stage when new skills have been acquired
and this may make it seem easier to understand.

Group Therapy
The Young–Bramham Programme may be applied in individual sessions or in
a group format. Group work provides normalisation, mutual understanding and
peer support; these are considered important factors since adults with ADHD may
feel socially isolated and misunderstood by others. A group forum provides the
opportunity to meet people with similar problems and to share strategies for coping with difficulties. Individuals can validate their own experiences by sharing
their thoughts with other adults with ADHD (Hallowell, 1995). In addition it provides opportunities for acquiring and rehearsing key skills within a supportive
non-critical environment.
We have successfully delivered the core aspects of the Young–Bramham Programme
in a one-day ‘group foundation workshop’ format. In traditional group therapy, clients
meet weekly for 1–2 hours over a set period, but we have found that a workshop
paradigm also works with ADHD individuals as they respond positively to the
‘immediacy’ of workshops, for example by presenting one topic in the morning and
a different topic in the afternoon. It also means that it is possible to provide treatment
to individuals who are unable to commit to weekly meetings. However, by delivering
the Young–Bramham Programme in an intensive workshop format, it is essential
that techniques and teaching aids are introduced in order to shift attention and
maintain interest and motivation, for example inclusion of group role-plays, working
in pairs and/or small groups, group discussions. We recommend that frequent breaks
are introduced in Programme Workshops (e.g. 10 minutes every 1½ hours) and
participants are provided with detailed handouts that contain exercises to complete
within the workshop and/or later at home to reinforce the techniques presented.

Agendas
Agendas are a method of providing structure within each session and should be
drawn up collaboratively. The therapist needs to adhere closely to the agenda and
not be distracted by ‘crises’, which may be presented by the client week by week.
This will provide a model for the clients on how to deal with difficult situations in a
rational and non-catastrophic manner. For example, an issue arising one week may

TREATMENT OF ADHD 55

be put on the agenda for the subsequent session, by which point it may no longer be
construed as such a difficult area.

Goal Setting
The therapist must introduce the concept of the modular approach by clarifying with
the client that treatment cannot address everything at once. Much as the client may
wish to address multiple problems in one disorganised session, this is unhelpful and
will leave both the therapist and the client feeling dissatisfied. Clear specific goals
need to be established collaboratively at the onset of therapy, which are carefully
broken down into stages. The client is likely to require assistance in this latter task,
as it may be difficult for the client to see beyond one overarching goal, such as ‘I
want people to like me’, or ‘I want to succeed’. Goals should be reviewed regularly in
order to maintain focus and prevent the temptation to become distracted, for example, by lurching from crisis to crisis. The modular structure of the Young–Bramham
Programme will be helpful in this respect.

Rewards
Rewards are important for individuals with ADHD as they find it difficult to delay
gratification and tend to opt for a short-term smaller reward rather than wait for
longer term larger reinforcement. This feature of ADHD needs to be incorporated
into treatment so that individuals are rewarded regularly for achievement, otherwise
they are likely to lose interest in therapy and become distracted.

Homework
Homework tasks are set at the end of each session. It is important that clients learn
to take responsibility for rehearsing and endorsing techniques learned in sessions in
an applied setting. Resistance to homework tasks needs to be addressed, obstacles
identified, anticipated and overcome by planning alternative strategies.

Treatment Termination
Given that ADHD is a chronic disorder, it can be difficult to identify a point at
which to end therapy. It is therefore important to clearly specify tangible goals at
the beginning of therapy and to regularly review progress. Nevertheless, it may be
necessary to offer more sessions than other clients require, as it may take a client
longer to acquire skills. This may result in dependence on the therapist and the
concept of termination must be introduced early in treatment to avoid a situation in
which the client feels isolated, abandoned and without the confidence to apply the
structure and techniques learned in the Programme. The transition from treatment
to autonomy needs to be planned carefully with collaboration, for example reducing

56 ADHD IN ADULTS
the frequency of sessions and/or conducting brief planned follow-ups in person or
by telephone.

Relapse Prevention
Adults with ADHD have the potential to catastrophise when they encounter future
difficulties. Motivational interviewing techniques are therefore useful for reframing
problems as slips and lapses. Pre-planned booster sessions are a sensible way of
supporting a client through termination of therapy and prevent relapse. Treatment
needs to incorporate a plan for ‘risk’ situations and/or times when the client may feel
vulnerable. By identifying such times/situations, the client can consider appropriate
coping mechanisms and avoid responding impulsively. By forward planning and
thinking through the consequences of proposed behaviour, clients may learn to avoid
challenging situations and/or cope better when faced with them. Relapse plans need
to be multi-faceted, for example including seeking social support and/or advice, applying cognitive techniques and avoidance of troublesome situations/persons.

CONCLUSIONS
ADHD is a disorder that presents with core symptomatology, comorbid problems
and skills deficits. Treatment for adults with ADHD typically follows a pharmacological route, which is helpful to alleviate core symptoms in ADHD adults and
results in clients being better placed to succeed in psychological interventions. The
Young–Bramham Programme with its modular cumulative skills acquisition provides treatment according to the needs of the clients.
The Young–Bramham Programme provides an integrated framework for understanding ADHD, adjusting to the diagnosis and developing techniques to cope with
symptomatology and associated problems through: the provision of psychoeducational information; drawing on motivational interviewing techniques; and the use of
cognitive behavioural therapy. The following chapters introduce the Young–Bramham
Programme modules and describe the treatment techniques in detail.

PART II

CORE SYMPTOMS

4
