INATTENTION AND MEMORY PROBLEMS

This chapter is the first of four chapters in the section outlining treatments for the
core symptoms of ADHD, beginning with the hallmark of ADHD – attentional problems. The following chapters in this section include methods to assess and treat time
management, problem solving and impulsivity in adults with ADHD.
People with ADHD have attentional impairments that can disadvantage them in a
busy society with its high demand for multi-tasking. Attentional impairment can
lead to many problems in day-to-day functioning, including difficulty listening, failure to finish tasks and being easily distracted. This means that completing tasks
simultaneously and to an acceptable and satisfactory standard is difficult for people
with ADHD. The ability to attend and concentrate comprises a number of stages of
mental skill required for personal, social and occupational adaptive functioning. The
human brain has several attentional systems serving different functions in everyday
behaviour, and impairment in the central executive component of working memory
may lead to inefficiency in the allocation of attentional resources (Baddeley, 1986;
Baddeley & Wilson, 1988).
This chapter will discuss the domains of attention most likely to be affected by
ADHD, the relationship between motivation and attention, the impact of anxiety and
stress on attention, methods to teach individuals to recognise tasks that are likely
to be problematic and strategies to help clients cope more appropriately and adaptively. The latter includes ways in which the client may adapt their environment to
minimise distraction and thus maximise their ability to concentrate; that is, external
strategies that involve the selection of the most appropriate surroundings in which
the client is most likely to succeed. Internal strategies to sustain attention and motivation are also suggested and these can be rehearsed in sessions with the therapist.
The chapter also discusses how ADHD impacts on an individual’s memory processing and introduces strategies that the individual can adapt to achieve their potential
within the constraints of an environment. Specific techniques to improve memory
are outlined, again by applying both external and internal strategies.

60 ADHD IN ADULTS

ATTENTION AND ATTENTIONAL CONTROL
Attention is the process that allows us to focus on particular features of our environment such that we are aware of them at a particular moment in time. Attentional control processes determine at any given moment where to prioritise effort and to which
stimuli to attend. These control processes are complex ‘higher order’ cognitive functions that allow attention to be selective to one stimulus, divided between several
stimuli and shifted between stimuli. In some ways, difficulties in attentional control
could be regarded as being at the centre of the cognitive deficits underpinning all
aspects of attentional impairment in ADHD. If an individual is unable to govern
what they will listen to, look at and focus on, then they have lost attentional control,
and they are likely to exhibit the problems presented by people with ADHD. Norman and Shallice (1986) and Shallice and Burgess (1996) theorise that attentional
control is achieved through the organisation of a ‘supervisory attentional system’,
which is similar to Baddeley’s (1986) concept of the ‘central executive’ (discussed
later in this chapter). These models propose that the supervisory attentional system/
central executive is a ‘higher order’ cognitive function that determines which stimuli
in the environment are prioritised with regard to attentional focus, particularly in
novel situations. Certain activities make greater demands on the supervisory attentional system than others, for example, forward planning, responding to feedback
and self-monitoring. Conversely, problems within the supervisory attentional/central
executive system can lead to various attentional deficits and ultimately can affect
memory functioning. For people with ADHD, these types of attentional deficit can
be subdivided into four domains.

Domains of Attention Affected by ADHD
There are several domains or types of attention, but the main four are: selective
attention, divided attention, attention shifting and sustained attention. Examples
of attentional impairments in each of these domains of attentional functioning are
given in Table 4.1. We also have provided this description of the different types of
attention which can be affected by the disorder in a handout format on the Companion
Website, as, in our experience, people with ADHD want to develop their knowledge
and understanding about attentional processes and this will help them to identify,
apply and/or adapt strategies to overcome their problems.
Selective attention involves the ability to focus on a specific task in hand. For
example, being able to read whilst traveling on public transport and ignoring all
other distractions. However, in some situations it is necessary to be able to attend to
two or more sources of information, or ‘divide attention’. This is a common demand
of everyday life, for example, making conversation whilst driving. A similar ability
is that of ‘attention shifting’ where there are competing demands on cognitive functions, and attention needs to be shifted from one source to another, for example using a recipe to cook a meal.

INATTENTION AND MEMORY PROBLEMS 61
Table 4.1

Examples of attentional impairments

Domain of attention

Associated problems

Selective

Being unable to see detail
Being ‘slapdash’
Making mistakes in reading or filling in forms
Skipping lines in questionnaires
Not being able to focus on a conversation or task when there
is background noise
Not being able to do two things at once to an acceptable
standard
Getting stuck on one topic and not being able to change track
Always starting tasks but never finishing because it is
difficult to resume an original task
Losing track of a conversation, film, book, etc.
Being distracted by own thoughts (internal) or anything else
going on around (external)

Divided

Shifting

Sustained

An example of the types of attentional problems experienced by clients with ADHD
can be seen by their performance on the Test of Everyday Attention (Robertson et al.,
1994). As a measure of selective and divided attention, the participant is required to
perform a task involving identification of stimuli from an array, in other words, they
are presented a page from the Yellow Pages and asked to identify plumbers which
are marked with a double cross, star, circle or square. They are then required to perform the same task, but this time it is done simultaneously with an equally important
task of counting tones played on a tape recorder. For people without ADHD, their
speed and accuracy at performing the original task is reduced by performing a second
task. However, adults with ADHD become increasingly error prone and they become
unable to do both tasks simultaneously. This means they often stop one task in order
to concentrate on the other. This strategy leads to a suboptimal speed. To put this into
the context of everyday life, this means that people with ADHD have great difficulty
multi-tasking. In order to complete a task well, and without making errors, they have
to apply all their resources to focusing on that task. This is difficult for three reasons:
1. They find it difficult to maintain the degree of attentional control.
2. They are easily distracted from the task.
3. They give up on the task because they are not reaching their goal (i.e. a lack of
positive reinforcement).
For adults with ADHD, difficulty with sustaining attention is probably the most pronounced and disabling attentional problem as individuals often struggle to engage
in activities that are long, irrespective of whether they are repetitious or tedious. If
a task is lengthy and also tedious, the client with ADHD is likely to completely give
up on the task. The chores that we have to do in our daily lives are by definition

62 ADHD IN ADULTS
routine and many are boring and repetitious. It is not possible to have a daily routine that is consistently full of excitement and high stimulation. When people with
ADHD are faced with mundane tasks they respond with irritation, which is a source
of frustration for the individual with ADHD as well as those who live or work with
them. These feelings, coupled with a lot of unfinished tasks, are likely to leave the
individual with a sense of failure and low self-esteem. In contrast, when activities are
particularly interesting or motivating and/or involve immediate gratification (such as
the rapid feedback and reinforcement introduced in many popular computer games),
people with ADHD are generally able to concentrate. Such inconsistency can be difficult for people around them to understand. We have heard many complaints from
partners about half-finished household do-it-yourself jobs. One of our clients had a
half-painted lounge, a half-plumbed washing machine, the shell of a wardrobe built
in the bedroom, and tiles for the bathroom had been purchased six months earlier
but remained stacked up on the bathroom floor. It can be confusing to observe the
individual with ADHD being competent in one domain (e.g. surfing the internet), yet
unable to achieve in another one which is perceived as more important (e.g. writing
a CV). The primary difference between the tasks is fluctuating levels of motivation,
which is not always under control of the person with ADHD.

Motivation and Attention
There are two forms of motivation: extrinsic motivation and intrinsic motivation
(Deci, Koestner & Ryan, 1999). Both can be affected by ADHD and can fluctuate
considerably throughout any given time period:
1. Extrinsic motivation refers to rewards or incentives for people for performing
well, or avoiding negative consequences.
2. Intrinsic motivation is determined by interest in an activity.
With regard to extrinsic motivation, the person must have some expectation that
they can achieve the desired goals, otherwise they will feel demotivated regardless
of the reward or incentive. However, people with ADHD often feel demotivated as
they have experienced years of underachievement. When motivation drops, attention and effort also drop. A status of learned helplessness may develop. A person
can change the way they view a task and their ability to achieve it by setting clear
goals and rewarding their attention to the task with incentives. External reward systems need to be realistic, appropriate and achievable. Goal setting is a motivational
strategy that has been shown to enhance attentional performance when difficult but
achievable goals are set (Deci et al., 1999). If goals are not achieved then failure will
reinforce learned helplessness and the ADHD client will ‘switch off’. We describe
techniques that will help with goal setting and their achievement in Chapter 5 (Time
Management) and Chapter 6 (Problem Solving).
Feedback is a crucial component of intrinsic motivation as it helps the person
determine the discrepancy between desired and actual performance. If a person has

INATTENTION AND MEMORY PROBLEMS 63

a sense of self-efficacy and believes they can do something, they will feel they have
control. A sense of control will improve their motivation and optimise their attention for the task. However, if a task is perceived to be out of a person’s control, the
person may lose interest and stop attending. This means the task will be unfinished,
which will reinforce a sense of failure. A negative feedback loop may develop from
repeated failures and learned helplessness. Conversely, a sense of self-efficacy will
be associated with successful and persistent performance.

Identifying Attentional Deficits and Their Functions
The attentional impairments associated with ADHD affect different people in different ways. Some examples of reported attentional difficulties are described below:
1. They lose their train of thought. This is especially irritating if they forget what
they want to say in the middle of speaking.
2. When there are a lot of people around or a lot of noise in the background they find
it difficult to sustain a conversation.
3. They find it difficult to sustain an in-depth conversation about a single topic.
Other thoughts or ideas come flooding into their mind which they cannot suppress. At parties, people get annoyed with them as they see them as fickle as they
flit about, talking to different people and/or changing topics of conversation.
4. Their mind wanders and they ‘drift off’ or start to daydream when they watch
television, read a book or study in class.
5. They start lots of tasks but never finish them. They get distracted into doing
something different.
6. They find it difficult to do more than one task at a time, such as driving a car
whilst having a conversation with a passenger.
There are, of course, individual differences in everything we do, and this is no different in terms of strengths and weaknesses of attentional control. For example,
some people have greater difficulty with sustaining attention whereas others have
greater difficulty with dividing attention. Different tasks present different challenges. Some people find that they are more productive with several activities on
the go; that is, providing themselves with ‘constructive’ distraction to reduce the
likelihood of becoming bored with a primary task. Others find this impedes their
performance. Mood and motivational processes may also affect performance. The
goal of the therapist is to identify specific areas of weakness and help the individual develop compensatory strategies to facilitate achievement. The client should
be taught to recognise tasks that are likely to be problematic and respond appropriately and adaptively. This goal will be influenced if there is a dominant symptom of ADHD (e.g. predominantly inattentive type or predominantly hyperactive/
impulsive type), what the person wants to achieve and what support they have. In
many ways, ‘forewarned is forearmed’, so recognising and preparing for tasks that
are likely to be problematic is the first major step towards improving attentional difficulties. Once specific tasks have been identified for which the individual has difficulty

64 ADHD IN ADULTS
with attentional control, then these should be targeted for improvement by applying
both external strategies and internal strategies. External strategies involve adaptation
of the environment and internal strategies involve a process of self-monitoring.

Applying External Strategies to Cope with Attentional Problems
External distraction refers to all outside sensory information (i.e. both auditory and
visual) that is being processed at the expense of the required task. Cutting down on
irrelevant distraction can help the individual focus on the subject of interest. The
application of external strategies requires the individual to make adaptations to their
environment in order to maximise the likelihood that they may optimally achieve
success. We describe this to clients as making ‘change from the outside in’ and
describe some techniques in Table 4.2, which can be discussed in sessions with the
client. The client must be encouraged to set up ‘mini experiments’ between sessions
in order to test out which techniques are most suitable for them and work best.
There are many possibilities and the client themselves may have ideas to try out or
already established strategies that are helpful. When following up the efficacy of a
strategy, it is important to determine whether the client applied the strategy correctly
and/or appropriately. Sometimes distractions are welcome, especially if the client is
engaged in a tedious task.

Applying Internal Strategies to Cope with Attentional Problems
The application of internal strategies to optimise performance or ‘change from the
inside out’ requires the individual to learn persistence of effort and the suppression
of internal urges. It is important to encourage the client to maximise their ability to
sustain attention by increasing interest and motivation. This can be achieved by setting
small achievable goals and introducing an ‘immediate’ reward system and/or regular
breaks. Indeed, a primary difference between treating people with ADHD and other
clients is the introduction of systematic reward systems in the treatment as individuals
with ADHD are unable to delay gratification and are averse to delay. This means they
favour small regular rewards as opposed to having greater rewards that are spread out
over a longer period. However, the client needs to be encouraged to focus on completion
of a task over a long period, so introducing lots of small ‘immediate’ or regular rewards
and a larger reward is recommended for completion of the overall goal or task. Aside
from the set reward for finishing a task, completing a task is a reward in itself as it gives
the client a sense of achievement. Achievement is a very strong reinforcer.
Table 4.3 outlines various suggestions that can be explored in sessions that may help
the client improve attentional control. These include the introduction of a reward
system, competition with others or themselves, maximisation of novelty, physiological arousal, cognitive challenges, repetition, goal setting, and allocating breaks. Of
course, not every strategy will suit every client, and some clients will benefit more

INATTENTION AND MEMORY PROBLEMS 65
Table 4.2

External strategies to improve attentional control

Source of distraction

Proposed techniques

Auditory

Listening to low level music without lyrics can be useful to
mask out other more intermittent noises. Music with words
should generally be avoided as this can interfere with
thoughts and lead to further distraction
Although it can be awkward to request that others around them
try to reduce their noise, this strategy can be rehearsed in
sessions. The client may then work out a way of making this
request that is least likely to offend. Often people feel relieved
when the environment is quieter, so their efforts may be
supported and appreciated
The simple strategy of using earplugs can be effective in
blocking out all but the loudest of sounds without the
individual needing to do their own filtration
Telephone calls can interrupt concentration and output. Whilst
it is acknowledged that some calls may be essential, this is
rarely the case for all calls. Telephones can be switched to
silent mode, and checked for messages at a convenient time,
regular intervals, or when a task has been completed
If a task is portable, it may be helpful for the client to move
away from a noisy environment, for example, at home where
the television and radio are blaring. If they cannot find a
quieter room in their house, then they could negotiate with a
friend to use a quiet room somewhere else or work in a library

Visual

Distracting visual material such as noticeboards, pictures, etc.,
should be positioned out of the line of vision where or when
an individual is working
Facing a window can be distracting even when nothing is
happening outside as it is tempting for people with ADHD
to gaze outside and daydream. However, facing a wall can
lead to feelings of restlessness. Often facing into a room can
provide the best compromise for limiting distractibility and
reducing restlessness
Using bright colours to attract attention to the task can be
helpful. For example using post-it notes, and highlighter pens
It can be useful to place a cue card (e.g. a photograph, a cut out
from a magazine, a note) in ‘risk’ places to remind the person
to pay attention. For example, ‘Stop dreaming! Focus!’ can be
written on notes stuck onto the top of a computer monitor.

66 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 4.3

Internal strategies to improve attentional control

Reward

The development of an incentive and reward programme is a
priority. This should be introduced when targeting small goals
as well as larger ones as it capitalises on the need of ADHD
people for immediate gratification. Rewards can be simple
activities like having a tea break or walking around the block

Competition

People with ADHD can be encouraged to increase their interest
and stimulation in an activity by introducing a competitive
element (e.g. let’s see if this can be finished in one hour) or by
incorporating a pre-existing interest (e.g. if a client enjoys using
computers, encourage them to pay bills via the internet)

Novelty

People with ADHD may be more motivated in new situations, so
they should be encouraged to capitalise on the ‘novelty factor’
by accepting new tasks in exchange for old, less interesting
ones (e.g. taking on new roles with enthusiasm)

Snap!

Encourage clients to wear an elastic band around the wrist. This
can be snapped in order to reorient attention at times when it
has drifted and increases the overall level of alertness

Cognitive challenges

Develop strategies to cope with times when a client loses their
train of thought, e.g. they should not be embarrassed to say to
someone ‘I’m sorry but I have forgotten what I was saying’.
This can be rehearsed in role-play. Dysfunctional thoughts
regarding what it means to lose attention and how this may be
perceived by others can be cognitively challenged in sessions

Repetition

In cases when the client has difficulty following and retaining
information (e.g. when being given instructions), they should
be encouraged to ask for these to be repeated. Again this can
be rehearsed in role-play so the client may overcome feelings of
embarrassment and/or humiliation

Goal setting

Help the client to set achievable goals and avoid overarching
intangible goals that may be difficult to operationalise. They
should be encouraged to reflect on what it feels like to finish a
task and gain a sense of achievement. Principles of pleasure and
mastery may be incorporated (see Chapter 11 on low mood)

Breaks

It is important to break up activities. The client should train
themselves to allocate enforced breaks in tasks, especially when
these are mundane or tedious. The client should additionally
allocate breaks immediately prior to a ‘risk period’ when they
may lose concentration or interest, e.g. if they can concentrate
for 30 minutes, they should break after 25 minutes

INATTENTION AND MEMORY PROBLEMS 67

from some than others, so it is a matter of discussing potential techniques of benefit
in the session, setting homework to establish what works by investigating ‘miniexperiments’ and evaluating outcome. The client will often have developed their
own ideas and strategies, and these will be a helpful indicator of what will be most
useful to them.

Distractibility and Restlessness
A particular problem for people with ADHD is that they are distracted from the task
in hand. They find it difficult to stay on task for two reasons:
1. External distraction: i.e. noticing irrelevant details (e.g. someone walking past
the window).
2. Internal distraction: i.e. having the urge to do something more stimulating (e.g.
chatting when they are supposed to be working quietly).
Motoric overactivity is frequently a disabling symptom in childhood, but less so in
adulthood. We have not met many ADHD adults running around the therapy room,
jumping out of windows, climbing trees, or skateboarding down the hospital corridor. Whilst adults with ADHD may have developed better control over their hyperactive behaviour, they often report a feeling of ‘internal’ restlessness. Some people
find it almost impossible to stay sitting down or have a feeling of being ‘driven by a
motor’. However, in adulthood, restlessness is most commonly expressed by pacing,
tapping fingers, jigging feet, changing posture, fiddling with things, swaying from
foot-to-foot, humming, and/or excessive talking. Such difficulties are commonly
mistaken or misdiagnosed as generalised anxiety or manic depression.
Clients should be encouraged to capitalise on this energy by performing tasks that
involve exertion. If appropriate, this may be introduced as part of the reward system
with the day being organised to include regular periods when they are able to move
around and dispel pent up restlessness and energy. At the same time, it is helpful to
identify situations that the client finds more relaxing and restful, and structuring
these into their day as part of an activity schedule (see Chapter 5 on Time Management). Such times can be helpfully timetabled following the completion of cognitively challenging and emotionally demanding tasks.

Anxiety, Stress and Attention
Attentional control decreases when a person is fatigued, stressed and/or worried.
If the person is self-monitoring and thinking ‘I can’t do this, I’ll fail’ then their
attentional ability is likely to be more impaired due to the competing demands of
worrying about how well they will do it and their actual performance on the task in
hand. The impairment then becomes exacerbated and becomes a function of stress
and anxiety. The vicious cycle and self-fulfilling prophecy of stress and anxiety is

68 ADHD IN ADULTS

I’m so nervous, I’ll
lose my train of
thought

Anxiety

Attentional impairment

External
distraction
from other
side of
room

Attentional impairment

Internal distraction
from anxious
thoughts

Anxiety

I can’t remember what
I was saying

Figure 4.1 The spiral of anxiety and attentional control

presented in Figure 4.1 with an example of someone becoming anxious in a social
situation (also on the Companion Website in handout form). When this occurs,
clients become highly distractible. It is hard enough at the best of times for them to
be motivated to remain on task, but if they feel acutely anxious about their performance and/or lose their confidence to do well, they will become even less motivated,
have many unfinished tasks (both important and less important) and feel even more
stressed and distressed. Chapter 9 outlines specific characteristics of people with
ADHD who have comorbid anxiety and techniques to help them.

MEMORY PROBLEMS
Memory problems are present in many psychiatric disorders, both with or without
an organic basis. In people with ADHD, memory problems are often associated with
their attentional problems. Memory problems are also the most obvious problem to
the person themselves and to those around them as a poor memory is often more
exposing than poor attention.

INATTENTION AND MEMORY PROBLEMS 69

Common Memory Problems in ADHD
The types of memory problem reported by individuals with ADHD include:
1. Misplacing things, e.g. forgetting where they have put their glasses, keys.
2. Forgetting appointments, deadlines and activities that need to be done in the
future, such as forgetting to pay the rent.
3. ‘Losing time’, i.e. not attending to time passing, or having a distorted sense of
time resulting in them being late and not knowing where time has gone.
4. Forgetting instructions, if someone tries to explain how to do a task they have to
slow down and repeat it a number of times.
5. Mental processing, e.g. mental arithmetic.
These problems arise due to disruptions in memory processes within the three major memory systems that are presented in Figure 4.2: immediate memory (i.e. very
brief storage for all sensations); short-term/working memory (i.e. temporary storage
where information can be manipulated); and long-term memory (i.e. storage over
longer periods).
Both shorter and longer term memory deficits may be present in clients with ADHD,
although ‘working memory’ or short-term memory deficits are more often identified
(MacLean et al., 2004a; Young et al., 2006). A figural representation of memory
processes is presented on the Companion Website, which can be used in sessions to

Figure 4.2 Memory systems
Adapted from Head Injury © Trevor Powell, 2004, Speechmark Publishing Ltd, Bicester.

70 ADHD IN ADULTS
explain the problems commonly experienced by people with ADHD in order to help
clients understand their difficulties.

Immediate Memory
Immediate memory is often regarded as a ‘sense’ memory as it provides brief storage for all the senses including vision, sounds, smells, emotion, touch and taste. It
is like a scratchpad or snapshot of information, which is quickly overwritten by new
sensations coming online. For some people with ADHD, they may have particular
difficulty if their immediate memory becomes overloaded with too much stimulation
from too many different sources and this leads them to become extremely distractible. Attentional processes are also likely to determine the quality of information
that enters the immediate memory. When information in immediate memory needs
to be used it is then transferred into the ‘short-term’ memory or ‘working memory’
where it can be rehearsed or manipulated.

Short-term Memory/Working Memory
After the information has been received in the immediate memory system, it is then
held for a very brief period in a ‘short-term’ or ‘working memory’ system. This is
a temporary storage for information, like a rewritable cassette or video recording,
before it enters long-term memory or is ‘rejected’ and thus becomes unrecoverable.
Working memory has been shown to be disrupted in people with ADHD, possibly
through poor attention or interference from distraction. Figure 4.3 shows the three
components that make up the working memory (Baddeley, 1986).
The central executive determines what sensory information is attended to, or
provides an attentional control system as discussed earlier, both for the subsystems of working memory and other cognitive functions. This can be particularly affected in ADHD due to susceptibility to distraction. The phonological
loop is an auditory memory system that stores a few seconds’ worth of information, like a short circular cassette tape. Information stored on the tape can
either be rehearsed after it is recorded or erased by new information overwriting

Attentional Control
Visuospatial
Sketchpad

Central
Central
Executive
Executive

Phonological
Loop

Figure 4.3 Working memory model
From Baddeley (1986) Working Memory. Clarendon/Oxford University Press.

INATTENTION AND MEMORY PROBLEMS 71

it. The visuospatial sketch-pad is a visual analogue, and can be likened to an
‘etchasketch’ toy where images can be stored then wiped out by further information. In ADHD it is possible that information does not enter working memory
adequately and that the same length of material cannot be stored as for people
without ADHD. Furthermore, problems with the ‘central executive’ can lead to
difficulties attending to the appropriate material in order for it to be processed by
the working memory.

Long-term Memory
Information is transferred from the working memory to long-term memory, which
rather confusingly refers to all information from only a few minutes ago to years
since the event. There are three stages of this memory system: encoding; storage; and retrieval. Encoding involves registering and processing information, and
is highly dependent on attentional processes and hence can be affected in people
with ADHD. Storage of learned information is affected by a large range of factors
that interfere with brain functioning and is evidenced by forgetting. Retrieval of
stored information involves explicit recall or implicit knowledge revealed in later
performance.
Retrieval can depend on strategies for accessing information, such as trying to
retrace one’s steps in order to find a lost possession. In ADHD, this process may
be more haphazard without a strategy. Retrieval can also be affected by the way
information has been encoded. For example, ADHD clients have been shown
to exhibit difficulties in organising information at the encoding stage, such as
organising material into categories, and hence have resulting difficulties in optimal retrieval.

Applying External Strategies to Improving Memory
There are several strategies that the client may adapt to try to help them improve
their memory. These commonly include the introduction of external aids; that is,
using support systems to minimise problems arising from poor memory, such as the
use of diaries, planners, etc., and specific strategies are listed in Table 4.4. Electronic
organisers are invaluable. However, as we increasingly move towards advanced
information technology, it is important for clients to ensure that electronic organisers are the servant of the individual and do not become the master and provide an
opportunity for distraction and time wasting. Moreover, there are also internal strategies that can be applied and, for optimal results, the client should be encouraged to
develop both internal and external methods to enhance memory. As discussed previously for developing attentional control, the therapist should investigate what the
client has successfully applied in the past, identify new possibilities, set homework
tasks to evaluate their efficacy and review with the client the best and most appropriate techniques.

72 ADHD IN ADULTS
Table 4.4

External strategies to improve memory

Diary

A diary is helpful for short-term planning. A ‘page-a-day’ diary is most
useful as appointments can be recorded as well as additional notes, e.g.
tasks to complete, items needed, etc. Having this information presented
in a day format serves as a cue and reminder of tasks (or steps) that need
to be completed to achieve longer-term goals

Weekly calendar

A weekly calendar allows family members to write reminders and instructions
that may be helpful for the individual. For example, for a family birthday
party, another family member may devise an action plan dividing up the
responsibilities by noting ‘book a taxi’, ‘buy a cake’, ‘book the restaurant’,
etc. It is additionally helpful for the person with ADHD to see how their
activities integrate with those of their family

Annual wall
planner

This can be used for longer-term plans and forward planning, e.g. by marking
up school holidays, family vacations, birthdays and anniversaries

Portable
dictaphone/
recorder

These can be used to make verbal lists and reminders for information
that may quickly go out of mind. Some people find it helpful to carry
a dictaphone around with them so they can quickly record ideas and
reminders. The list of tasks or reminders can then be worked through
systematically at a later point in time

Answerphone
messages

Some telephone systems, including mobile phones, give the opportunity
for individuals to leave themselves answerphone messages. This can
help to reduce the need to remember information in the future

Lists

It will be helpful to get the person with ADHD into the habit of making lists.
These will include daily lists of ‘things to do’, shopping lists, housework
chores. Organising ideas into lists and categories can also help someone
with ADHD to develop a sense of control. Ticking off completed items
serves as feedback and can be a motivator through positive reinforcement

Help cards

Summarised forms of information such as ‘help cards’ can be useful for
activities that are not performed regularly such as setting the video, or
filling in tax return forms

Watches and
clocks

Clocks can be positioned in obvious places, even in every room in the
house, in order to remind the person with ADHD of the passage of time.
Clocks with chimes or watches that beep can be useful for orienting
someone to time when they have become distracted

Alarms and/or
computerised
reminders

These can serve as reminders over varying time periods ranging from a
three hourly alarm to take medication to setting an annual reminder to
prompt an individual about a friend’s birthday

Personal
organisers and
mobile phones

Personal organisers and mobile phones can perform many of the
above tasks. However, if their organisational functions are new to
the client then these should be introduced and developed gradually
into a routine, with goal setting agreed with the therapist to make
sure that this is not yet another strategy that has been started and
quickly abandoned. The aim is that these items are functional and not
distractors. The organiser should only be kept in certain places and
backed-up, as it may be even more disabling for a person with ADHD
to lose the organiser and/or memory system in the organiser

INATTENTION AND MEMORY PROBLEMS 73

Applying Internal Strategies to Improve Memory
Aside from the plethora of external strategies, internal memory strategies may also
be used in conjunction with external memory strategies in order to enhance encoding
and retrieval memory processes. Specific strategies are outlined in Table 4.5. If the
client develops internal strategies for improving their memory then this will improve
their confidence and self-efficacy, rather than relying entirely on external aids.

Table 4.5

Internal strategies to improve memory

Repetition and
rehearsal

Repeating and practicing recall of information, e.g. through
self-talk, can improve the likelihood of information being
successfully processed by working memory and then encoded for
longer-term recall

Create a visual cue

Pairing a verbal task with a visual image can improve verbal
retention as it allows information to be encoded in both a
visual and verbal form. This enhances the memory trace and
increases the likelihood of later retrieval. The more bizarre and
exaggerated the image, the easier it will be to remember. For
example, if remembering to pay a water bill, think of white-water
rafting to the bank!

Mnemonics

Learning cues or mnemonics can be a useful method of condensing
information for later recall and can appear less overwhelming
for someone with ADHD. For example, S.T.O.P. ⫽ sausages,
tomatoes, oranges, potatoes

Spaced retrieval

Memory research has shown that gradually increasing the
time span between retrieval times increases the likelihood
of it being retrieved in the future, and thus improves storage
through reinforcement of a memory trace (Ebbinghaus, 1885).
Information should be rehearsed with increasingly longer gaps,
e.g. 5 minutes, 30 minutes, an hour, next day, etc. Performing
this exercise throughout a session and beyond can allow someone
with ADHD to improve their self-efficacy

Problem solving

A good method for finding lost or mislaid possessions is to mentally
retrace steps in a systematic way. This can be done by asking the
client a sequence of questions such as ‘when did I last have my
keys?’ ‘where did I go when I got in?’ or ‘where would I put that
key now?’

Keeping calm

High emotional arousal and feelings of stress can interfere
with both attention and memory functioning. Therefore it is
important to encourage the client to reduce anxiety and anger
before attempting any recall. See Chapters 9 and 10 for specific
strategies, including relaxation techniques

74 ADHD IN ADULTS

CONCLUSIONS
Attentional and memory difficulties are common cognitive deficits for adults with
ADHD. However, there is much variation in the difficulties that arise due to individual variation in the disorder, motivational factors and state arousal. In addition,
environmental factors also play a large part in attentional control. This chapter has
explained the ways in which attention is affected in ADHD. It is important for individuals to develop an awareness of situations in which their attention becomes
impaired. Once these have been recognised and established, the person can then
develop strategies to improve attentional control and reduce both external and internal distractors. Attentional deficits also impact on memory functioning and internal/
external strategies may be adopted to improve memory. In treatment, the clinician
therefore adopts a two-pronged approach to overcome attentional and memory problems, by introducing the notion of ‘change from the outside in’, and ‘change from
the inside out’.

5
